text:How to validate digital signatures in e-Aadhaar?	labels:Computer must be connected to internet while validating digital signature. Right click on the 'validity unknown' icon and click on 'Validate Signature' You will get the signature validation status window, click on 'Signature Properties'. Click on 'Show Certificate.' Verify that there is a certification path named 'NIC sub-CA for NIC 2011, National Informatics centre'. This identifies 'NIC sub-CA for NIC 2011, National Informatics centre' as the owner of the digital certificate that has been used when signing the document. Mark the certification path named 'NIC sub-CA for NIC 2011, National Informatics centre', click the 'Trust' tab and then 'Add to Trusted Identities'. Answer 'OK' to any security question that follows. Check (✔) the field for 'Use this certificate as a trusted root' and click 'OK' twice to close this and the next window. Click 'Validate Signature' to execute the validation.   Note: - Once 'NIC sub-CA for NIC 2011, National Informatics centre' has been as a Trusted Identity, any subsequent documents with digital signatures from CCA will be validated automatically when opened. 	episode_done:True
text:What Is the Password of e-Aadhaar?	labels:Combination of the first 4 letters of name in CAPITAL and the year of birth (YYYY) as password. For Example: Example 1  Name: SURESH KUMAR  Year of Birth: 1990  Password: SURE1990 Example 2  Name: SAI KUMAR  Year of Birth: 1990  Password: SAIK1990 Example 3  Name: P. KUMAR  Year of Birth: 1990  Password: P.KU1990 Example 4  Name: RIA  Year of Birth: 1990  Password: RIA1990 	episode_done:True
text:What supporting software needed to open e-Aadhaar?	labels:Resident needs 'Adobe Reader' to view e-Aadhaar. You have 'Adobe Reader' installed in your System. To install Adobe Reader in the System visit https://get.adobe.com/reader/ 	episode_done:True
text:How can Resident download e-Aadhaar?	labels:Resident can download e-Aadhaar by following two ways. By Using Enrollment Number:Resident can download e-Aadhaar using 28 digit enrolment no. along with Full Name and Pin code. In this download process OTP is received on registered mobile no. Resident can also use TOTP to download e-Aadhaar instead of OTP. TOTP can generated using mAadhaar mobile Application.  By Using Aadhaar No:Resident can download e-Aadhaar by using 12 digits Aadhaar No. along with Full Name and Pin code. In this download process OTP is received on registered mobile no. Resident can also use TOTP to download e-Aadhaar instead of OTP. TOTP can generated using mAadhaar mobile Application. 	episode_done:True
text:From where Resident can download e-Aadhaar?	labels:Resident can download e-Aadhaar by visiting UIDAI websites - https://uidai.gov.in/ or by visiting https://eaadhaar.uidai.gov.in 	episode_done:True
text:What is Masked Aadhaar?	labels:Mask Aadhaar option allows you to mask your Aadhaar number in your downloaded e-Aadhaar. Masked Aadhaar number implies replacing of first 8 digits of Aadhaar number with some characters like “xxxx-xxxx” while only last 4 digits of the Aadhaar Number are visible. 	episode_done:True
text:Is e-Aadhaar equally valid like physical copy of Aadhaar?	labels:As per Aadhaar Act, e-Aadhaar is equally valid like Physical Copy of Aadhaar for all purposes. For UIDAI circular on validity of e Aadhaar, please visit https://uidai.gov.in/images/uidai_om_on_e_aadhaar_validity.pdf 	episode_done:True
text:What is e-Aadhaar?	labels:e-Aadhaar is a password protected electronic copy of Aadhaar, which is digitally signed by the competent Authority of UIDAI.	episode_done:True
text:What is the expiry period of VID?	labels:At this time there is no expiry period defined for VID. VID will be valid till the time a new VID is generated by the Aadhaar number holder. 	episode_done:True
text:Will re-generation of VID lead to the same VID or a different VID?	labels:After the minimum validity period (currently set as 1 calender day), on Aadhaar number holder requests regeneration, a new VID will be generated and the previous VID will be deactivated. In case resident opts for retrieval of VID, the last active VID will be sent to the Aadhaar number holder 	episode_done:True
text:Can an agency store VID?	labels:No. Since VID is temporary and can be changed by the Aadhaar number holder, storing VID has no value. Agencies should not store VID in any database or logs. 	episode_done:True
text:In case of VID, do I need to provide consent for authentication?	labels:Yes, Aadhaar number holder consent is necessary for VID based authentication. Agency is required to inform the Aadhaar number holder the purpose for authentication and collect explicit consent for performing authentication. 	episode_done:True
text:Can VID be used for OTP or biometrics or demographics authentication?	labels:Yes. VID can be used in lieu of Aadhaar number in Authentication API input. Various entities will update their Aadhaar authentication application by 31st May 2019 to accept VID as an input for authentication. 	episode_done:True
text:What if an Aadhaar number holder forgets VID? Can he/she obtain again?	labels:Yes, UIDAI will provide multiple ways to generate new and/or retrieve current VID. These options will be made available via UIDAI’s resident portal, eAadhaar, Aadhaar Enrolment centre, mAadhaar mobile application etc. Presently, VID generation facility is available on UIDAI's resident portal. Whenever required, VID number will be sent to residents via SMS on registered mobile number. VID can also be retrieved by sending an SMS to the Aadhaar helpline number 1947. Resident will have to type “RVIDLast 4 digits of Aadhaar Number” and send it to 1947 through the registered Mobile Number. 	episode_done:True
text:Can anyone else generate VID for me?	labels:No other entity like AUA/KUA can generate VID on behalf of Aadhaar number holder.	episode_done:True
text:How does a resident obtain VID?	labels:VID can be generated only by the Aadhaar number holder. They can also replace (generate a new VID) their VID from time to time after UIDAI set minimum validity period (currently set as 1 calender day, i.e. a new VID be generated after 00:00 hrs on the next day) . At any given time only one VID will be valid for an Aadhaar number. UIDAI will provide various options to Aadhaar number holders to generate their VID, retrieve their VID in case they forget, and replace their VID with a new number. These options will be made available via UIDAI’s resident portal, eAadhaar download, Aadhaar Enrolment centre, mAadhaar mobile application etc. Presently, VID generation facility is available on UIDAI's resident portal. Whenever required, VID will be sent to residents via SMS on registered mobile number. VID can also be generated by sending an SMS to the Aadhaar helpline number 1947. Resident will have to type “GVIDLast 4 digits of Aadhaar Number” and send it to 1947 through the registered Mobile Number.  	episode_done:True
text:What is Virtual ID (VID)?	labels:VID is a temporary, revocable 16-digit random number mapped with the Aadhaar number. VID can be used in lieu of Aadhaar number whenever authentication or e-KYC services are performed. Authentication may be performed using VID in a manner similar to using Aadhaar number. It is not possible to derive Aadhaar number from VID.	episode_done:True
text:What details can I update in Self Service Update Portal (SSUP)?	labels:You can update your Address online in Self Service Update Portal (SSUP). For other details updates such as Demographic details (Name, Address, DoB, Gender, Mobile Number, Email) as well as Biometrics (Finger Prints, Iris & Photograph) in Aadhaar you will have to visit Permanent Enrolment Center. 	episode_done:True
text:Is it necessary that my mobile number should be registered with Aadhaar while requesting for any kind of update?	labels:If you are using online Self Service Update Portal (SSUP) for update, your mobile number must be registered with Aadhaar otherwise you can visit nearest Permanent Enrolment centre with Supporting Documents. 	episode_done:True
text:Where can I Update my Mobile Number? 	labels:You can update your mobile number by visiting a Permanent Enrolment Center.  	episode_done:True
text:How can I submit my Supporting documents in case of online Self Service Update portal (SSUP)?	labels:You will be required to upload original scanned (with color scanner) copies of PoA document as per the Valid Documents List. Refer Link for valid documents. 	episode_done:True
text:I do not have any document proof of my address. Can I still update my address in my Aadhaar? 	labels:Yes, you can update your current address by requesting for Address Validation Letter with the help of an Address Verifier. Know about the process in detail from FAQs : Request for Address Validation Letter. 	episode_done:True
text:How do I add my father’s / husband’s name to my address? 	labels:Relationship details are a part of address field in Aadhaar. This has been standardized to C/o (Care of). Filling this is optional. 	episode_done:True
text:Can I update my address in my local language?	labels:In addition to English you can update/do correction in your address in any of the following languages: Assamese, Bengali, English, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odia, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu. 	episode_done:True
text:I successfully submitted my address update request. How can I track this?	labels:On successful submission of an online address update request, you receive a URN (Update Request Number) of the format 0000/00XXX/XXXXX. This is shown on screen and also sent via SMS to your registered mobile number. Use this URN and your Aadhaar number to track status of your Aadhaar update from: https://ssup.uidai.gov.in/checkSSUPStatus/checkupdatestatus 	episode_done:True
text:My update request got rejected for invalid documents. What does this mean?	labels:The document you use for Online Address Update should be:  Valid document as per https://ssup.uidai.gov.in/ssup/instruction  In the name of the resident requesting the update Image uploaded should be clear and colored scan of original document  Ensure that you follow the above before you create a new update request. 	episode_done:True
text:What is Aadhaar Authentication history?	labels:Aadhaar Authentication history service hosted on UIDAI Website provides details of authentication performed by the individual resident in past. 	episode_done:True
text:Where can a resident check his/her Aadhaar Authentication history?	labels:Authentication History service is hosted on UIDAI Website at URL https://resident.uidai.gov.in/aadhaar-auth-history. 	episode_done:True
text:What is the procedure for checking Aadhaar Authentication history on UIDAI websites?	labels:Resident can check his/her Aadhaar Authentication history from UIDAI Websites by using his/her Aadhaar Number/VID and following the directions on website.Note: Registered mobile number is mandatory to avail this service. 	episode_done:True
text:What Information resident can get from Aadhaar Authentication history?	labels:Resident can get the following information in Aadhaar Authentication history against every Authentication done by resident.                1. Auth Modality.2. Date & Time of Authentication.3. UIDAI Response code.4. AUA Name5. AUA Transaction ID (With Code)6. Authentication Response (Success/Failure)7. UIDAI Error code 	episode_done:True
text:This facility allows me to view maximum 50 authentication records. How can I check more records?	labels:Aadhaar number holder can view details of all authentication records performed by any Authentication User Agency (AUA) or by him/her in the last 6 months. However, maximum of 50 records can be viewed at one point of time. 	episode_done:True
text:Some of authentication transactions records are showing as failed, what should I do?	labels:For every failed authentication transaction record, specific error code is assigned. Please check the details of error code number against that failed authentication transaction to know the reason of failure. 	episode_done:True
text:If I have not performed some of the transactions listed in the records, what should I do?	labels:If the listed authentication transaction is not performed by the Aadhaar number holder, resident may contact the respective Authentication User Agency (AUA) for further details. 	episode_done:True
text:What is UIDAI Response Code in the authentication records?	labels:For every authentication transaction performed by an Aadhaar number holder, UIDAI generates a unique code to identify the transactions and sends the same to Authentication User Agency (AUA) along with the response. This Response Code is helpful to uniquely identify the transaction by AUA as well as UIDAI and may be used for any further enquiry from AUA by the Aadhaar number holder. 	episode_done:True
text:What is AUA Transaction ID in the authentication records?	labels:For every authentication transaction performed by an Aadhaar number holder, AUA generates a unique Transaction ID to identify the transaction and sends the same to UIDAI as part of the authentication request. This Transaction ID along with Response Code can be used for any further enquiry from AUA by the Aadhaar number holder. 	episode_done:True
text:What is Auth Modality?	labels:UIDAI provides authentication facility with different modes such as demographic, biometric (fingerprint or iris) or One Time Password (OTP). Auth Modality shows the mode of authentication used to perform that specific authentication transaction. 	episode_done:True
text:What are the UIDAI services?	labels:Below are the UIDAI services which are used by Aadhaar number holder to perform Aadhaar Authentication:  Verify Aadhaar Number: This will enable service providers and Aadhaar number holders to verify if the Aadhaar number is valid and is not deactivated Verify Email/Mobile Number: This will enable service providers and Aadhaar number holders to verify if the Aadhaar number is valid and is not deactivated Lock/Unlock Biometrics: Aadhaar number holders can secure their biometric authentication by locking their biometrics. Once locked, same cannot be used by anyone for authentication. Residents can unlock their biometrics before any biometric authentications transaction. Check Aadhaar & Bank Account Linking Status : Aadhaar holders can check if their Aadhaar is linked to their bank account. Aadhaar Linking status is fetched from NPCI Server. Under any circumstance, UIDAI shall not be responsible or liable for the correctness of the displayed status. Further, UIDAI is not storing any information fetched from NPCI server. However, it may be noted that Bank account and Aadhaar linking is not mandatory as per the SC Judgment dated 26.9.2018. Aadhaar Authentication History : Aadhaar number holders can view the details of Aadhaar Authentication hey have done. Virtual ID Generator: Aadhaar Number holders can generate their 16 Digit Virtual ID (VID). 	episode_done:True
text:What are Error Codes?	labels:Below are Error Code List -“100” – Personal information demographic data did not match.“200” – Personal address demographic data did not match.“300” – Biometric data did not match.“310” – Duplicate fingers used.“311” – Duplicate Irises used.“312” – FMR and FIR cannot be used in same transaction.“313” – Single FIR record contains more than one finger.“314” – Number of FMR/FIR should not exceed 10.“315” – Number of IIR should not exceed 2.“316” – Number of FID should not exceed 1.“330” – Biometrics locked by Aadhaar holder.“400” – Invalid OTP value.“402” – “txn” value did not match with “txn” value used in Request OTP API.“500” – Invalid encryption of session key.“501” – Invalid certificate identifier in “ci” attribute of “Skey”.“502” – Invalid encryption of PID.“503” – Invalid encryption of Hmac.“504” – Session key re-initiation required due to expiry or key out of sync.“505” – Synchronized Key usage not allowed for the AUA.“510” – Invalid Auth XML format.“511” – Invalid PID XML format.“512” – Invalid Aadhaar holder consent in “rc” attribute of “Auth”.“520” – Invalid “tid” value.“521” – Invalid “dc” code under Meta tag.“524” – Invalid “mi” code under Meta tag.“527” – Invalid “mc” code under Meta tag.“530” – Invalid authenticator code.“540” – Invalid Auth XML version.“541” – Invalid PID XML version.“542” – AUA not authorized for ASA. This error will be returned if AUA and ASA do not have linking in the portal.“543” – Sub-AUA not associated with “AUA”. This error will be returned if Sub-AUA specified in “sa” attribute is not added as “Sub-AUA” in portal.“550” – Invalid “Uses” element attributes.“551” – Invalid “tid” value.“553” – Registered devices currently not supported. This feature is being implemented in a phased manner.“554” – Public devices are not allowed to be used.“555” – rdsId is invalid and not part of certification registry.“556” – rdsVer is invalid and not part of certification registry.“557” – dpId is invalid and not part of certification registry.“558” – Invalid dih.“559” – Device Certificate has expired.“560” – DP Master Certificate has expired.“561” – Request expired (“Pid->ts” value is older than N hours where N is a configured threshold in authentication server).“562” – Timestamp value is future time (value specified “Pid->ts” is ahead of authentication server time beyond acceptable threshold).“563” – Duplicate request (this error occurs when exactly same authentication request was re-sent by AUA).“564” – HMAC Validation failed.“565” – AUA license has expired.“566” – Invalid non-decryptable license key.“567” – Invalid input (this error occurs when unsupported characters were found in Indian language values, “lname” or “lav”).“568” – Unsupported Language.“569” – Digital signature verification failed (means that authentication request XML was modified after it was signed).“570” – Invalid key info in digital signature (this means that certificate used for signing the authentication request is not valid – it is either expired, or does not belong to the AUA or is not created by a well-known Certification Authority).“571” – PIN requires reset.“572” – Invalid biometric position.“573” – Pi usage not allowed as per license.“574”– Pa usage not allowed as per license.“575”– Pfa usage not allowed as per license.“576” - FMR usage not allowed as per license.“577” – FIR usage not allowed as per license.“578” – IIR usage not allowed as per license.“579” – OTP usage not allowed as per license.“580” – PIN usage not allowed as per license.“581” – Fuzzy matching usage not allowed as per license.“582” – Local language usage not allowed as per license.“586” – FID usage not allowed as per license. This feature is being implemented in a phased manner.“587” – Name space not allowed.“588” – Registered device not allowed as per license.“590” – Public device not allowed as per license.“710” – Missing “Pi” data as specified in “Uses”.“720” – Missing “Pa” data as specified in “Uses”.“721” – Missing “Pfa” data as specified in “Uses”.“730” – Missing PIN data as specified in “Uses”.“740” – Missing OTP data as specified in “Uses”.“800” – Invalid biometric data.“810” – Missing biometric data as specified in “Uses”.“811” – Missing biometric data in CIDR for the given Aadhaar number.“812” – Aadhaar holder has not done “Best Finger Detection”. Application should initiate BFD to help Aadhaar holder identify their best fingers.“820” – Missing or empty value for “bt” attribute in “Uses” element.“821” – Invalid value in the “bt” attribute of “Uses” element.“822” – Invalid value in the “bs” attribute of “Bio” element within “Pid”.“901” – No authentication data found in the request (this corresponds to a scenario wherein none of the auth data – Demo, Pv, or Bios – is present).“902” – Invalid “dob” value in the “Pi” element (this corresponds to a scenarios wherein “dob” attribute is not of the format “YYYY” or “YYYYMM-DD”, or the age is not in valid range).“910” – Invalid “mv” value in the “Pi” element.“911” – Invalid “mv” value in the “Pfa” element.“912” – Invalid “ms” value.“913” – Both “Pa” and “Pfa” are present in the authentication request (Pa and Pfa are mutually exclusive).“930 to 939” – Technical error that are internal to authentication server.“940” – Unauthorized ASA channel.“941” – Unspecified ASA channel.“950” – OTP store related technical error.“951” – Biometric lock related technical error.“980” – Unsupported option.“995” – Aadhaar suspended by competent authority.“996” – Aadhaar cancelled (Aadhaar is no in authenticable status).“997” – Aadhaar suspended (Aadhaar is not in authenticatable status).“998” – Invalid Aadhaar Number.“999” – Unknown error. 	episode_done:True
text:What Is the Password to view Aadhaar Authentication Report?	labels:Combination of the first 4 letters of name in CAPITAL and the year of birth (YYYY) as password.For Example:Example 1Name: SURESH KUMARYear of Birth: 1990Password: SURE1990Example 2Name: SAI KUMARYear of Birth: 1990Password: SAIK1990Example 3Name: P. KUMARYear of Birth: 1990Password: P.KU1990Example 4Name: RIAYear of Birth: 1990Password: RIA1990 	episode_done:True
text:What is UIDAI Secure QR Code? How QR Code enhance the security of e-Aadhaar?	labels:UIDAI e-Aadhaar letter contains a QR code. UIDAI has replaced existing QR code, on e-Aadhaar, having Resident’s demographic details with a secured QR Code which contains demographics along with photograph of the Aadhaar holder. There will be two QR Codes – Small one on front side of cutaway portion with demographic data only; and a large one on top portion of front side and rear side of cutaway portion, with demographic data and photo.  Further, to make this Information more secured and tamper-proof, it will be signed with UIDAI digital signature. This new digitally signed QR code can be read ONLY using UIDAI’s windows based Custom client for desktops/laptops and validate it against UIDAI digital signatures in real time. Therefore, any fraud attempted on e-Aadhaar can be easily detected by using QR Code scanner.  	episode_done:True
text:What information does new Secure QR Code of e-Aadhaar contain?	labels:Both QR codes of e-Aadhaar contain demographic details of resident like Name,  Address, Date of Birth, Gender and Masked Aadhaar Number. In addition, the larger QR code contains photograph also. 	episode_done:True
text:How can someone read new secure QR code available on e-Aadhaar?	labels:The new digitally signed QR code can be read by ONLY using UIDAI’s windows based application and validate it against UIDAI digital signatures. Application can be downloaded from uidai.gov.in. Additionally, a good quality STQC certified QR Code scanner will be required. Important: It is recommended to print e-Aadhaar having this secure QR code using LaserJet printer only. 	episode_done:True
text:How QR Scanner and UIDAI Application will work?	labels:Post installation of UIDAI’s QR code reader application, secure QR code of e-Aadhaar need to be scanned using the physical scanner in line with UIDAI Specifications. The application will display the demographic details of resident once the QR Code of e-Aadhaar is digitally verified by UIDAI at backend and give scan QR Code verified.  In case the digital signature is not verified the reader displays QR Code not verified GUI Screen.  	episode_done:True
text:Who all can use secure QR code of e-Aadhaar?	labels:Anyone, whether a Aadhaar Holder or an User/Service Agencies like Banks, AUAs, KUAs etc can use this facility for offline verification of the data in e-Aadhaar.Note:- On 20th February 2018 new QR Code was implemented on e-Aadhaar and the QR Code reader client is available on uidai.gov.in from 27th March 2018. 	episode_done:True
text:What is Hashing?	labels:Hashing is an algorithm that calculates a fixed-size bit string value from a file. A file basically contains blocks of data. Hashing transforms this data into a far shorter fixed-length value or key which represents the original string. The hash value can be considered the distilled summary of everything within that file.A good hashing algorithm would exhibit a property called the avalanche effect, where the resulting hash output would change significantly or entirely even when a single bit or byte of data within a file is changed. A hash function that does not do this is considered to have poor randomization, which would be easy to break by hackers.A hash is usually a hexadecimal string of several characters. Hashing is also a unidirectional process so you can never work backwards to get back the original data.A hash is usually a hexadecimal string of several characters. Hashing is also a unidirectional process so you can never work backwards to get back the original data. 	episode_done:True
text:What are the benefits of Hashing?	labels:One main use of hashing is to compare two files for equality. Without opening two document files to compare them word-for-word, the calculated hash values of these files will allow the owner to know immediately if they are different.Hashing is also used to verify the integrity of a file after it has been transferred from one place to another, typically in a file backup program like SyncBack. To ensure the transferred file is not corrupted, a user can compare the hash value of both files. If they are the same, then the transferred file is an identical copy.In some situations, an encrypted file may be designed to never change the file size nor the last modification date and time (for example, virtual drive container files). In such cases, it would be impossible to tell at a glance if two similar files are different or not, but the hash values would easily tell these files apart if they are different. 	episode_done:True
text:Why is it needed for our QR Code Client?	labels:Comparing HASH will ensure that the client that has been downloaded is the one that was provided by UIDAI. UIDAI will provide SHA-1 and SHA-256 for verification. 	episode_done:True
text:Where can I find the Public Certificate for Digital Signature validation?	labels:Public certificate for Digital signature validation can be downloaded from here. 	episode_done:True
text:What is Aadhaar Paperless Offline e-KYC?	labels:It is a secure sharable document which can be used by any Aadhaar number holder for offline verification of Identification. A resident desirous of using this facility shall generate his/her digitally signed Aadhaar details by accessing UIDAI resident portal. The details will contain Name, Address, Photo, Gender, DOB, hash of registered Mobile Number, hash of registered Email Address and reference id which contains last 4 digits of Aadhaar Number followed by time stamp in a digitally signed XML. It will provide Offline Aadhaar Verification facility to service providers/Offline Verification Seeking Entity (OVSE) without the need to collect or store Aadhaar number. 	episode_done:True
text:How to generate Offline Aadhaar?	labels:The process of generating Aadhaar Offline e-KYC is explained below:   Go to URL https://resident.uidai.gov.in/offlineaadhaar Enter ‘Aadhaar Number’ or ‘VID’ and mentioned ‘Security Code’ in screen, then click on ‘Send OTP’ or ‘Enter TOTP’. The OTP will be sent to the registered Mobile Number for the given Aadhaar number or VID. TOTP will be available on m-Aadhaar mobile Application of UIDAI. Enter the OTP received/TOTP. Enter a Share Code which be the password for the ZIP file and click on ‘Download’ button The Zip file containing the digitally signed XML will be downloaded to device wherein the above mentioned steps have been performed.  	episode_done:True
text:Who are the users of this Aadhaar Paperless Offline e-KYC?	labels:Any Aadhaar number holder who desires to establish his/her identity to any service provider (OVSE) using digitally signed XML downloaded from UIDAI website can be a user of this service. The service provider should have provisions of providing this Aadhaar Paperless Offline e-KYC at their facility and do the offline verification 	episode_done:True
text:How to share this Paperless Offline eKYC document with the service provider?	labels:Residents can share the XML ZIP file along with the Share Code to the service provider as per their mutual convenience. 	episode_done:True
text:How will service providers use Aadhaar Offline e-KYC?	labels:The process of Aadhaar Offline e-KYC Verification by Service Provider is:   Once service provider obtains the ZIP file, it extracts the XML file using the password (share code) provided by the resident. The XML file will contain the demographic details such as Name, DOB, Gender and Address. Photo is in base 64 encoded format which can be rendered directly using any utility or plane HTML page. Email Address and Mobile number are hashed. Service Provider has to collect Email Address and Mobile number from residents and perform below operations in order to validate the hash: Mobile Number: Hashing logic: Sha256(Sha256(Mobile+ShareCode))*number of times of last digit of Aadhaar Number Example :  Mobile number: 9800000002 Aadhaar Number: 123412341234 Share Code: Abc@123 Sha256(Sha256(9800000002+ Abc@123))*4In case if Aadhaar Number ends with Zero or 1 (123412341230/1) it will be hashed one time.Sha256(Sha256(9800000002+ Abc@123))*1 Email Address: Hashing Logic: This is a simple SHA256 hash of the email without any salt  Entire XML is digitally signed and Service Provider can validate the XML file using the signature and public key available on the UIDAI website.(https://uidai.gov.in/images/uidai_offline_publickey_26022019.cer).   	episode_done:True
text:Can this Offline Paperless eKYC document be shared to other entities by the Service Provider?	labels:Service Providers shall not share, publish or display either Share Code or XML file or its contents with anyone else. Any non-compliance of these actions shall invite actions under Sections 17 and 25 of The Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulation, 2016, Sections 4 and 6 of The Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulation, 2016 and Sections 29(2), 29 (3) and 37 of The Aadhaar Act, 2016. 	episode_done:True
text:How this Aadhaar Offline Paperless eKYC document is different from the other identification documents produced offline by residents?	labels:Identity verification can simply be accomplished by providing an identity document like PAN card, Passport etc to the service provider. However, all these documents, which may be used for identification can still be forged and faked which may or may not be possible to verify offline instantaneously. The document verifier has no technological means to verify the authenticity of the document or the information it contains and has to trust the document producer. Whereas, the XML file generated by the Aadhaar number holder using Aadhaar Paperless Offline e-KYC is digitally signed document using UIDAI digital signature. Thus, the service provider can verify the demographic contents of the file and certify it to be authentic when doing the offline verification 	episode_done:True
text:Where can I find the Public Certificate for Digital Signature validation?	labels:Public certificate for Digital signature validation can be downloaded from here. 	episode_done:True
text:Who and when to lock Biometrics?	labels:Any resident with valid Aadhaar should be able to use the service. This feature empowers an Aadhaar holder to lock biometric. After locking biometrics if a UID is used for invoking any of the Authentication services using a biometric modality (Fingerprint/Iris) a specific error code '330' indicating biometrics are locked. 	episode_done:True
text:How to Unlock (locked)Biometrics?	labels:Once resident enables Biometric Locking system their biometric remains locked till the Aadhaar Holder chose to:  Unlock it (which is temporary )or Disable the Locking system  Note: Registered Mobile Number is essential to avail this service. In case your mobile number is not registered with Aadhaar visit the nearest Enrolment Centre/Mobile Update End Point. 	episode_done:True
text:What happens when Biometric is locked?	labels:Locked Biometrics ensures the Aadhaar holder will not be able to use their Biometrics (fingerprints/iris) for authentication. 	episode_done:True
text:What Biometric can be locked?	labels:Fingerprint and iris data in Resident’s Aadhaar used for authentication can be locked.  	episode_done:True
text:What is Biometric Locking?	labels:Biometric Locking/Unlocking is a service that allows an Aadhaar holder to lock and temporarily unlock their biometrics. This facility aims to strengthen privacy and confidentiality of Resident's Biometrics Data. 	episode_done:True
text:I forgot my VID. How can I get it after locking UID?	labels:After Locking UID if resident forgot VID, Resident can make use of SMS service to Retrieve 16 digit VID on his register mobile number Send SMS 1947 with Aadhaar Register mobile number as RVID Space last 4 or 8 digit of UID. Ex:- RVID 1234 	episode_done:True
text:How can resident Unlock UID?	labels:For Unlocking UID resident should have latest VID number and if resident forgot 16 digit VID he can retrieve latest VID from SMS services RVID Space last 4 or 8 digit of UID. SMS to 1947. Ex- RVID 1234 Select Unlock radio button, Enter Latest VID and security Code and click on send OTP or select TOTP and click on Submit. Your UID will be unlocked successfully. 	episode_done:True
text:How can resident Lock UID?	labels:For Locking UID, Resident should have 16 digit VID number and it's a pre-requisite for locking. If resident don't have VID can generate via SMS Service or Resident Portal. SMS Service. GVID space last 4 or 8 digit of UID. SMS to 1947. Ex- GVID 1234. Open Resident portal Under Aadhaar Service Click on Lock & Unlock. Select UID Lock Radio Button and enter UID Number, Full Name, and Pin Code as in latest details and enter Security code. Click on Send OTP or select TOTP and click on submit. Your UID will be locked successfully. 	episode_done:True
text:What is UID Lock & Unlock? 	labels:Security and privacy of personal data has been the primary focus for resident, further attempt to strengthen security and provide control to the resident we have provisioned to support locking and unlocking 12 digit UID Resident can lock his UID number Via Resident Portal, by doing this Resident cannot perform any sort of Authentication by using UID, UID Token & ANCS Token for Biometric, Demographic & OTP Based authentication. Once UID is locked resident can authenticate using 16 digit VID Number for all forms of authentication (Demo, Bio & OTP). If resident wants to unlock UID he/she can do so on resident portal. After unlocking resident can authenticate using UID, UID Token & ANCS Token for Biometric, Demo & OTP Based Transaction and also he can authenticate with VID. 	episode_done:True
text:What is Aadhaar SMS Service? 	labels:Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) has introduced a service called “Aadhaar Services on SMS” which enables Aadhaar Number holders, who do not have access to internet/resident portal/m-Aadhaar etc. to use various Aadhaar services like Virtual ID generation/retrieval, Aadhaar lock/unlock etc. through SMS. Resident can avail Aadhaar Service by sending SMS from Registered Mobile to 1947. Resident can perform VID Generation/Retrieval, Lock/Unlock Aadhaar Number etc. by sending an SMS in the given format to 1947 from their registered mobile number. For More details on Virtual ID (VID) please visit: https://uidai.gov.in/contact-support/have-any-question/284-faqs/aadhaar-online-services/virtual-id-vid.html  	episode_done:True
text:Do I need to generate OTP for all Aadhaar SMS services?	labels:OTP Auhtentication is must for Aadhaar Lock/unlock and Biometric Lock/unlock Function. You don’t need OTP for VID Generation & Retrieval function. To get OTP send SMS -> GETOTPLAST 4 or 8 DIGITs of Aadhaar Number  Example - GETOTP 1234. 	episode_done:True
text:How to Lock/Unlock Aadhaar Number with SMS service?	labels:For Locking Aadhaar Number: Send OTP request as -> GETOTPLAST 4 or 8 DIGITs of Aadhaar Number Then send Locking Request as -> LOCKUIDLast 4 or 8 DIGIT of Aadhaar Number6 DIGIT OTP You will get a confirmation message for your request. Once it is locked you will not be able to perform any form of Authentication (Biometric, Demographic or OTP) using your Aadhaar Number. However, you can still use your latest Virtual ID for performing Authentication. For Un-Locking Aadhaar Number you must have your latest Virtual ID. Send OTP request with last 6 or 10 DIGITs of Virtual ID number as -> GETOTPLAST 6 or 10 DIGITs Virtual ID  Then send Unlocking Request as -> UNLOCKUIDLAST 6 or 10 DIGIT Virtual ID 6 DIGIT OTP 	episode_done:True
text:What is Virtual ID?	labels:VID or Virtual ID is a temporary, revocable 16-digit random number mapped with your Aadhaar number. Virtual ID can be used in lieu of Aadhaar number whenever authentication or e-KYC services are performed. Authentication may be performed using Virtual ID in a manner similar to using Aadhaar number. It is not possible to derive Aadhaar number from Virtual ID 	episode_done:True
text:What does Lock/Unlock Aadhaar mean?	labels:To further strengthen your privacy and security, UIDAI has introduced a feature to lock and unlock your Aadhaar Number. After locking your Aadhaar Number, Authentication cannot be performed using Aadhaar Number. In that case you may use your Virtual ID to perform Authentication. This will prevent the misuse of your Aadhaar Number by anyone else. Unlocking your Aadhaar Number will resume the use of Aadhaar Number for Authentication. 	episode_done:True
text:My SMS is not being sent. What should I do?	labels:Please check if your SMS service is working properly. In case of any issue with respect to the SMS not being sent, kindly contact your telecom service provider. It may be a case of bad network or non-functioning SMS service or low Balance etc 	episode_done:True
text:What are the different forms of Aadhaar and what are their features? 	labels:The Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) has introduced various forms of Aadhaar from time to time for the convenience of residents:  Aadhaar Letter: Paper-based laminated letter with secure QR Code with Issue Date and Print Date. Aadhaar letter is sent to resident free of cost by ordinary post in case of new enrolment or mandatory biometric update. If the Aadhaar letter is lost or destroyed, the resident can order a reprint online at a cost of Rs. 50/- from UIDAI’s official website. Reprinted Aadhaar letter is delivered to the resident by speed post. eAadhaar: eAadhaar is the electronic form of Aadhaar, digitally signed by UIDAI, having QR code for offline verification with Issue Date and Download Date. Resident can easily download eAadhaar/masked eAadhaar from UIDAI’s official website using registered mobile number. The masked eAadhaar displays only last 4 digits of Aadhaar number. eAadhaar is generated automatically with every Aadhaar enrolment or update and it can be downloaded free of cost. mAadhaar: mAadhaar is digital form of Aadhaar which can be installed on mobile device. mAadhaar app is available on Google play store/iOS for downloading on resident’s mobile device. It has QR code for offline verification. Like eAadhaar, mAadhaar is also generated automatically with every Aadhaar enrolment or update and it can be downloaded free of cost. Aadhaar PVC Card: Aadhaar PVC Card is the latest form of Aadhaar introduced by UIDAI. Other than being easy to carry and durable, the PVC-based Aadhaar Card has a digitally signed secure QR code with photograph and demographic details with multiple security features. It can be ordered online through uidai.gov.in or resident.uidai.gov.in using Aadhaar number, Virtual ID or Enrolment ID and paying a nominal charge of Rs. 50/-. Aadhaar PVC Card is delivered to the resident’s address by speed post. 	episode_done:True
text:Can I choose to have and use any form of Aadhaar?	labels:Yes. The residents can choose to have one or more forms of Aadhaar. The residents may also choose to use any form of Aadhaar as per their convenience. All forms of Aadhaar are equally valid as a proof of identity without giving any preference to one form of Aadhaar over the others. 	episode_done:True
text:What is “Order Aadhaar Card” service?	labels:“Order Aadhaar Card” is a new service launched by UIDAI which facilitates the Aadhaar holder to get their Aadhaar details printed on PVC card by paying nominal charges. Residents who do not have registered mobile number can also order using Non-Registered /Alternate Mobile Number. 	episode_done:True
text:What are the security features of “Aadhaar PVC Card”?	labels:This card contains security features like:  Secure QR Code Hologram Micro text Ghost image Issue Date & Print Date Guilloche Pattern Embossed Aadhaar Logo  	episode_done:True
text:What are the charges to be paid for “Aadhaar Card”?	labels:Charges to be paid are Rs.50/- (Inclusive of GST & speed post charges). 	episode_done:True
text:How one can raise the request for “Aadhaar Card”?	labels:"Aadhaar Card" request can be raised by visiting the UIDAI Official Website or Resident Portal (http://www.uidai.gov.in or https://resident.uidai.gov.in) using 12 digits Aadhaar Number (UID) or 16 digits Virtual Identification Number (VID) or 28 digits Enrollment ID. Request can be raised using registered or non-registered mobile number. Registered Mobile Number, where OTP/TOTP will be received on Registered Mobile number. Non-Registered /Alternate Mobile Number, where OTP will be received on Non-Registered/ Alternate Mobile number. 	episode_done:True
text:How to raise request using Registered Mobile Number?	labels: Please Visit https://uidai.gov.in or https://resident.uidai.gov.in Click on “Order Aadhaar Card” Service. Enter your 12 digit Aadhaar Number (UID) or 16 digit Virtual Identification Number (VID) or 28 digits Enrollment ID. Enter the security code If you have TOTP, choose option “I have TOTP” by clicking in check box else Click on “Request OTP” button. Enter OTP/TOTP received on registered mobile number. Click on the check box against “Terms and Conditions”. (Note: Click on hyper link to see details). Click on “Submit” Button to complete OTP/TOTP verification. On next screen, preview of the Aadhaar details will appear for verification by resident before placing the order for reprint. Click on “Make payment”. You will be re-directed to Payment Gateway page with payment options as Credit/Debit Card, Net banking and UPI. After successful payment, receipt will get generated having digital signature which can be downloaded by resident in PDF format. Resident will also get the Service Request Number via SMS. Resident can track the status of SRN till dispatch of Aadhaar Card on Check Aadhaar Card Status. SMS containing AWB number will also be sent once dispatched from DoP. Resident can further track delivery status by visiting DoP website. 	episode_done:True
text:How to raise request using Non-Registered/Alternate Mobile Number?	labels: Please Visit https://uidai.gov.in or https://resident.uidai.gov.in Click on “Order Aadhaar Card” Service. Enter your 12 digit Aadhaar Number (UID) or 16 digit Virtual Identification Number (VID) or 28 digits Enrollment ID. Enter the security code Click on check box “If you do not have a registered mobile number, please check in the box”. Please enter Non-Registered / Alternate Mobile Number. Click on “Send OTP” Click on the check box against “Terms and Conditions”. (Note: Click on hyper link to see details). Click on “Submit” Button to complete OTP verification. No preview of the Aadhaar details will be available. Click on “Make payment”. You will be re-directed to Payment Gateway page with payment options as Credit/Debit Card, Net banking and UPI. After successful payment, receipt will get generated having digital signature which can be downloaded by resident in PDF format. Resident will also get the Service Request Number via SMS. Resident can track the status of SRN till dispatch of Aadhaar Card on Check Aadhaar Card Status. SMS containing AWB number will also be sent once dispatched from DoP. Resident can further track delivery status by visiting DoP website. 	episode_done:True
text:Which modes are available to make the payment?	labels:Presently, the payment can be made using Online Mode of Payment. Residents can use following payment methods while making payment:-  Credit Card Debit Card Net Banking UPI  	episode_done:True
text:What is SRN?	labels:SRN is 28 digits Service Request Number which is generated after raising request for Aadhaar Card on our website. It will be generated every time whenever the request will be raised regardless whether payment is successful or not. 	episode_done:True
text:What is AWB number?	labels:Airway Bill Number is the tracking number that is generated by DoP i.e. India Speed Post for the assignment/product that they deliver. 	episode_done:True
text:What if residents want to get the Aadhaar Card printed with the details that they want?	labels:If residents want some changes in the details of printed Aadhaar letter or Card, then they first have to update their Aadhaar by visiting Permanent Enrollment Center or SSUP portal (depending on update) and then raise the request because this facility can be used to get the hard copy of Aadhaar Card/Letter. 	episode_done:True
text:How many days will it take to receive “Aadhaar Card” after creating successful request?	labels:After receiving order for Aadhaar Card from the resident UIDAI will handover printed Aadhaar Card to DoP within 5 working days (excluding the date of request). Aadhaar Card will be delivered using SPEED POST Service of Department of Post (DoP) in line with DoP delivery norms and Delivery Status may be tracked using DoP Status Track Services. 	episode_done:True
text:How Aadhaar Card is different from Aadhaar Letter?	labels:Aadhaar letter is laminated paper based document issued to the residents after enrolment and update.  Aadhaar Card is a durable and easy to carry PVC card with security features.  All forms of Aadhaar (eAadhhar, mAadhaar, Aadhaar letter, Aadhaar card) are equally valid.  The resident has the choice to use any of these forms of Aadhaar issued by UIDAI.  The ‘’Order Aadhaar PVC Card” service is available online on demand for the residents similar to online “Order Aadhaar Reprint” Service. 	episode_done:True
text:Does linking my bank account, PAN, and other services with Aadhaar make me vulnerable?	labels:No. As your bank information is not shared by the bank with anyone else, no one can have information about your bank account just by knowing your Aadhaar number. Also, UIDAI or any entity for that matter would not have any information about your bank account. For example, you give your mobile number at various places and to various authorities such as bank, passport authorities, income tax departments, etc. Would the telecom company have access to your bank information, income tax returns, etc.? Obviously no! Similarly, when you provide Aadhaar number to various service providers, your detail remains with the respective service providers and no single entity including the Government or UIDAI will have access to your personal information spread across various service providers. 	episode_done:True
text:Why am I asked to verify Bank account, Demat account, PAN and various other services with Aadhaar?	labels:As per the Supreme Court Judgement in the Aadhaar case (494 of 2012), residents are no longer required to mandatorily verify Bank account with Aadhaar. PAN Aadhaar linking is mandatory. A resident can voluntarily use his Aadhaar number in physical or electronic form by way of authentication or offline verification, or in such other form as may be specified by UIDAI. Mandatory Aadhaar authentication can be performed if the purpose is backed by law or it is in State interest. However, for availing subsidies, benefits, services beneficiaries are required to undergo mandatory Aadhaar authentication. when you link your bank account, demat account, mutual fund account, PAN, etc., with Aadhaar, you secure yourself because no one can impersonate you to avail these services. Often the fraudsters carry out transactions and transfer money from someone else’s account to their accounts and go untraced as they generally submit their fake identities to the bank while opening their accounts. They operate bank accounts in fictitious names/companies and run shell companies’ accounts to carry out money laundering or stash black money. Therefore, when all the bank accounts are verified with Aadhaar then it would not be possible for these unscrupulous elements to go untraced and banking as a whole would become more safe and secure as the identity of each bank account holders is established uniquely beyond doubt through eKYC. As of now 96 crore bank accounts out of total 110 crore accounts have been linked to Aadhaar. At the same time, you also contribute to serve the vital national interests by making the system rid of bogus, fakes and duplicates who could misuse IDs to evade taxes, siphon off public money, etc. Through use of Aadhaar and other process improvements, the Government has been able to weed out more than 6 crore fakes, duplicates and ghosts beneficiaries and save more than Rs. 90,000 crore of public money. Also, ghost and shell entities and companies used to be created for tax evasion, money laundering, terror financing, etc. Verification of identity through Aadhaar has helped curb these practices. Similarly, use of Aadhaar has checked unscrupulous elements that used to resort to impersonation in various examination and tests for college admission and jobs, etc., and thereby denying the genuine candidates of their rightful dues. There are number of other areas where verification of identity through Aadhaar has brought in fairness and transparency in the system. 	episode_done:True
text:Can a fraudster withdraw money from my Aadhaar linked bank account if he knows my Aadhaar number or has my Aadhaar card? Has any Aadhaar holder suffered any financial or other loss or identity theft on account of impersonation or misuse?	labels:Just like by merely knowing your bank account number, one cannot withdraw money from your account, similarly by merely knowing your Aadhaar number, no one can withdraw money from Aadhaar linked bank account. As in bank for withdrawing money, your signature, debit card, PIN, OTP, etc., is required, similarly for withdrawing money from your Aadhaar linked bank account through Aadhaar, your fingerprint, IRIS or OTP sent to your Aadhaar registered mobile will be required. No Aadhaar holder has suffered any financial or other loss or identity theft on account of any said misuse or attempted impersonation of Aadhaar. Notably, everyday more than 3 crore Authentications are carried out on the Aadhaar platform. In the last eight years, so far more than 3,012.5 crore authentications (till 28th May 2019) have been successfully done. UIDAI keeps upgrading and reviewing its security systems and safety mechanisms to make Aadhaar more secure and more useable. There has not been a single instance of biometric data breach from Aadhaar database. Therefore, people should freely use and give Aadhaar to prove their identity as and when required under the provisions of the Aadhaar Act, 2016. 	episode_done:True
text:There are many agencies that simply accept physical copy of Aadhaar and do not carry out any biometric or OTP authentication or verification. Is this a good practice?	labels:Aadhaar authentication can be performed for availing benefits, services and benefits falling under Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act, 2016 and if the purpose for which Aadhaar authentication is intended to be used is either backed by law made by parliament or is in the State interest. The verification of Aadhaar can be done offline through QR code available on the physical Aadhaar copy. If any agency does not follow these best practices, then that agency will be fully responsible for situations or losses arising out of possible misuse or impersonation. An Aadhaar holder is not responsible for the wrongful act of or by any agency. 	episode_done:True
text:What happens if some fraudster who obtains a copy of my Aadhaar card and tries to open a bank account in my name without my knowledge. Will I not be harmed?	labels:Under the PML Rules Aadhaar is one of the officially valid documents accepted for opening bank account and the bank is required to do other due diligence for banking transaction or KYC. If at all some fraudster tries to open bank account using Aadhaar and bank doensn’t carry any due diligence then in such case an Aadhaar holder cannot be held responsible for bank’s fault. It is just like if some fraudster opens a bank account by presenting someone else’s Voter card/Ration card, it is the bank that would be held responsible not the voter or ration card holder. Till date no Aadhaar holder has suffered any financial loss on account of such misuse. 	episode_done:True
text:I gave my Aadhaar card to a service provider for proving my identity. Can anyone harm me by knowing and misusing my Aadhaar number?	labels:No. Just, by knowing your Aadhaar number, no one can harm you. It’s just like any other identity document such as passport, voter ID, PAN card, ration card, driving license, etc., that you have been using freely for decades with service providers. Aadhaar identity, instead, is instantly verifiable and hence more trusted. Also, as per the Aadhaar Act 2016, the Aadhaar card is required to be verified  either by in physical or electronic formby way of authentication or offline verification, or in such other form as may be specified. Verification is done through fingerprint, iris scan, OTP authentication, and QR code etc. Hence, it is near impossible to impersonate you if you use Aadhaar to prove your identity. People have been freely giving other identity documents such as passport, voter ID, PAN card, ration card, driving license, etc. But did they stop using these documents for the fear that somebody would use them to impersonate? No! They continue using them and if any fraud happens, the law enforcement agencies handle them as per law. The same logic will apply to Aadhaar. In fact, Aadhaar is more secure than many other identity documents, because unlike other IDs, Aadhaar is instantly verifiable through biometric and OTP authentication and QR code. Further, under the Aadhaar Act, 2016 stringent penalties, including fines and imprisonment are provided whenever a person misuses your Aadhaar number or tries to cause any harm to you. 	episode_done:True
text:If Aadhaar has to be freely used for proving identity and it is safe to do so, then why has UIDAI advised people not to put up their Aadhaar number in Social Media or public domain?	labels:You use PAN card, debit card, credit card, bank cheques wherever required. But do you put these details openly on internet and social media such as Facebook, Twitter, etc.? Obviously no! You do not put such personal details unnecessarily in public domain so that there is no unwarranted invasion attempt on your privacy. The same logic needs to be applied in case of uses of Aadhaar.	episode_done:True
text:Recently, UIDAI has issued an advisory asking people not to share their Aadhaar number openly in the public domain especially on Social Media or other public platforms. Does this mean that I should not use Aadhaar freely?	labels:You should use your Aadhaar without any hesitation for proving your identity and doing transactions, just like you use your bank account number, PAN card, debit card, credit card, etc., wherever required. What UIDAI has advised is that Aadhaar card should be freely used for proving identity and doing transactions, but should not be put on public platforms like Twitter, Facebook, etc. People give their debit card or credit card details or cheque (which has bank account number) when they purchase goods, or pay school fee, water, electricity, telephone and other utility bills, etc. Similarly, you can freely use your Aadhaar to establish your identity as and when required without any fear. While using Aadhaar, you should do the same level of due diligence as you do in case of other ID cards – not more, not less.	episode_done:True
text:How do I link PAN with Aadhaar?	labels:You can link your PAN with Aadhaar by following process: a) Open the Income Tax e-filing portal - https://incometaxindiaefiling.gov.in/ b) Register on it (if not already done). Your PAN (Permanent Account Number) will be your user id. c) Log in by entering the User ID, password and date of birth. d) A pop up window will appear, prompting you to link your PAN with Aadhaar. If not, go to ‘Profile Settings’ on Menu bar and click on ‘Link Aadhaar’. e) Details such as name date of birth and gender will already be mentioned as per the PAN details. f) Verify the PAN details on screen with the ones mentioned on your Aadhaar. Pls. note that if there is a mismatch, you need to get the same corrected in either of the documents. g) If the details match, enter your Aadhaar number and click on the “link now” button. h) A pop-up message will inform you that your Aadhaar has been successfully linked to your PAN i) You may also visit https://www.utiitsl.com/ OR https://www.egov-nsdl.co.in/ to link your PAN and Aadhaar. 	episode_done:True
text:What is Aadhaar smart card or plastic card? Is it mandatory for getting services?	labels:There is no concept such as smart Aadhaar card. Aadhaar letter or Aadhaar downloaded from UIDAI website, in the form as may be specified from time to time, is sufficient and a valid form of Aadhaar. Only visit authorized common service centres or Aadhaar permanent enrolment centres for Aadhaar related services. For further info see this press release: https://goo.gl/TccM9f. 	episode_done:True
text:I applied for Aadhaar earlier but did not get it. So, I re-applied. When will I get my Aadhaar?	labels:If your Aadhaar was generated from the first Enrolment then every attempt to re-enrol will be rejected. DO NOT re-apply. You can retrieve your Aadhaar: (a) Online using https://resident.uidai.gov.in/lost-uideid (if you have the registered mobile no) (b) By visiting at permanent enrolment centre (c) By dialing 1947 	episode_done:True
text:I recently updated my Aadhaar. Can you please expedite it? I need it urgently.	labels:Aadhaar updation has a fixed process which takes up to 90 days from the date of requested. The updation process cannot be altered. Please wait. You may check the status from https://ssup.uidai.gov.in/ssup/ 	episode_done:True
text:I updated my Aadhaar recently. But it shows under manual check. When will it get updated?	labels:Aadhaar updation takes up to 90 days. If your update request is more than 90 days old, then Please dial 1947 (toll free) or write to This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. document.getElementById('cloak02eac837c5a04e9f5773ba458fb4b59d').innerHTML = ''; var prefix = '&#109;a' + 'i&#108;' + '&#116;o'; var path = 'hr' + 'ef' + '='; var addy02eac837c5a04e9f5773ba458fb4b59d = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;'; addy02eac837c5a04e9f5773ba458fb4b59d = addy02eac837c5a04e9f5773ba458fb4b59d + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n'; var addy_text02eac837c5a04e9f5773ba458fb4b59d = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;' + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n';document.getElementById('cloak02eac837c5a04e9f5773ba458fb4b59d').innerHTML += '<a ' + path + '\'' + prefix + ':' + addy02eac837c5a04e9f5773ba458fb4b59d + '\'>'+addy_text02eac837c5a04e9f5773ba458fb4b59d+'<\/a>'; for further assistance. 	episode_done:True
text:After I get Enroled, how long will it take to get my Aadhaar letter? And how do I get my Aadhaar letter?	labels:Aadhaar generation may take up to 90 days. Aadhaar letter is delivered by post. Once Aadhaar is generated, you also get a sms on registered mobile (if mobile number provided during enrolment).	episode_done:True
text:What can the Resident do if there are spelling mistakes/other demographic error in his/her Aadhaar Enrolment Slip (96 Hour Correction Window)	labels:The resident gets an opportunity to notice and correct such errors during enrolment while the data is being entered. One more opportunity is given to the resident to make corrections prior to finalization of Enrolment request and printing of the Enrolment Acknowledgment. In the event that both these opportunities are missed, resident can get the name address corrected by visiting the enrolment centre along with relevant documents and enrolment slip within 96 hours of enrolment.	episode_done:True
text:What if Aadhaar letter does not get delivered to a Resident?	labels:If resident does not get Aadhaar letter he/she should contact UIDAI contact centre with his/her Enrolment number or he/she may check Aadhaar status here.https://resident.uidai.gov.in/check-aadhaar-status or meanwhile resident can download e-Aadhaar . 	episode_done:True
text:What if Resident misplaces his Aadhaar number?	labels:a) Resident can find his Aadhaar number using Aadhaar Service - Retrieve Lost UID/EID b) Resident can call 1947 where our Contact Centre Agent will help him/her in getting his/her EID number. The resident can further use this EID to download his/her eAadhaar from Resident Portal - eAadhaar d) Resident can also get his/her Aadhaar number from EID number on IVRS system by calling 1947 	episode_done:True
text:Aadhaar letter section - What if a Resident misplaces his Aadhaar letter /forgets his Aadhaar?	labels:The resident can contact the Contact Centre (through phone / portal / email) with the enrolment number and make a request for sending a new letter communicating Aadhaar.	episode_done:True
text:What if a Resident gets rejected by the UIDAI and is not issued Aadhaar?	labels:The reason for rejection along with steps to be taken post rejection will be communicated to the resident and the Registrar.	episode_done:True
text:How to configure m-Aadhaar applications in phone (Android & iOS)?	labels:. mAadhaar App is available for both Android and iPhone users in India. In order to install the app follow the steps given below:  Visit the Google Play Store for Android and to App Store for iPhone. Type mAadhaar in the search bar and download, or download mAadhaar Android version from https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=in.gov.uidai.mAadhaarPlus&hl=en_IN or iOS version from https://apps.apple.com/in/app/maadhaar/id1435469474. To make sure you are downloading the right app, check to see if the developer’s name is listed as ‘Unique Identification Authority of India’ Once you open the app, it takes you through the terms and conditions and usage guidelines and language preference settings. Please go through them carefully before continuing further. 	episode_done:True
text:What is iOS compatible version for maadhaar app?	labels: The mAadhaar app for iPhone is compatible for iOS 10.0 and above. 	episode_done:True
text:Does my profile on mAadhaar get inactive when changed to new phone with registered mobile number?	labels:Yes, Aadhaar profile in a phone will automatically get deactivated the moment the same profile is registered in another mobile. Aadhaar can be registered only in one device at a time. 	episode_done:True
text:What are the features/benefit  of M-Aadhaar application?	labels:mAadhaar is more than Aadhaar card in a wallet. Using the mAadhaar App, the resident can avail the following benefits:  Get Aadhaar by Downloading or Ordering Reprint of Aadhaar or by retrieving lost or forgotten Aadhaar View/Show Aadhaar in offline mode, particularly when residents are required to show their ID proof Update Address in Aadhaar via document or without document proof Keep/Manage Aadhaar of family members(up to 5 members) in one mobile Share Paperless eKYC or QR code to service providing agencies Secure Aadhaar by Locking Aadhaar or Biometrics Generate or Retrieve VID which user can use in the place of Aadhaar to avail Aadhaar services (for those who have locked their Aadhaar or do not wish to share their Aadhaar). Use Aadhaar SMS services in offline mode Check Request Status Dashboard: After enrolling for Aadhaar, ordering reprint or updating Adhaar data, resident can check the status of the service request in the App. Help others who don’t own a smartphone in availing Aadhaar services with the help of common services. Get Update history and Authentication records Book Appointment to visit Aadhaar Seva Kendra Aadhaar Sync feature allows resident to fetch the updated data in Aadhaar profile after successful completion of an update request. Time-based One-Time Password can be used instead of SMS based OTP to avail Aadhaar Online Services available on the UIDAI Website Locate Enrolment Centre (EC) helps user find nearest enrolment Centre The More section in the App includes information about the mAadhaar App, Contact, Usage guidelines, Terms & Conditions of using the app and other necessary information. Apart from helpful FAQs and link to Chatbot the More section also contains links to important documents from where resident can download the Aadhaar enrolment or Aadhaar update/correction forms. 	episode_done:True
text:Where can m-Aadhaar be used?	labels:mAadhaar app can be used anywhere anytime within India. mAadhaar is more than Aadhaar card in a wallet. On one hand the mAadhaar profile is accepted as a valid ID proof by Airports and Railways on the other resident can use the features in the app to share their eKYC or QR code with service providers who sought Aadhaar verification of their customers before providing Aadhaar services.  	episode_done:True
text:How resident can create profile on m-Aadhaar App?	labels:Only someone with an Aadhaar linked to a registered mobile number can create Aadhaar profile in the mAadhaar App. They can register their profile in an App installed in any smartphone. However the OTP will be sent to only their registered mobile. Steps to register Aadhaar profile are given below:  Launch the app. Tap on the Register Aadhaar tab on the top of main dashboard Create a 4 digit Pin/Password(memorize this password, as it will be required to access profile) Provide Valid Aadhaar & enter valid Captcha Enter Valid OTP and submit The profile should get registered The registered tab would now display the registered Aadhaar Name Tap on My Aadhaar tab on the bottom menu Enter 4-digit Pin/Password My Aadhaar Dashboard appears  	episode_done:True
text:How resident can view the profile?	labels:The profile can be viewed by tapping on the profile summary on the top (profile image, name and Aadhaar number on the cyan tab) in the main dashboard. Steps to access the Aadhaar profile :  Launch the app. Tap on the Aadhaar Profile tab on the top at the bottom of main dashboard Enter 4 digit Pin/Password(created earlier while registering profile) The front side of the Aadhaar appears. Slide to left to view the back side. In order to view other added profiles, keep sliding to left  Note: To view the Aadhaar Profile page and access the services within tap on the My Aadhaar tab at the bottom of the Dashboard screen. 	episode_done:True
text:Is there any process to update the Aadhaar details through M-Aadhaar App , such like DOB, Mobile number , address etc. and completer process to be added.	labels:No, the facility to update demographic details such as Name, DoB, Mobile number aren’t not available in the mAadhaar app. Only address update via document or without document (+with Address Validation letter) facility is currently available.  However the demographics updates features may be included in future releases. 	episode_done:True
text:Is there any difference in specification and/or functionality of M-Aadhaar basis on iOS & android device?	labels:mAadhaar app provides same services to both iOS and Android device users. The functionality and UX remains same irrespective of devices (iOS, Android). 	episode_done:True
text:How to avoid entering your password again and again, on opening the app?	labels:Keeping the security and privacy of the Aadhaar holders in mind the app does not provide save password feature in the app. Hence the user will be required to enter password every time they wish to access profile or My Aadhaar. 	episode_done:True
text:Is it compulsory to have registered mobile number to use m-Aadhaar?	labels:No. Anyone in India with a smartphone can install and use mAadhaar App. Without an Aadhaar registered mobile number resident will be able to avail only a few of the services such as Order Aadhaar reprint, Locate Enrolment Center, Verify Aadhaar, Scanning QR code etc.   However registered mobile number is mandatory to avail all other Aadhaar services and Aadhaar Profile services listed under My Aadhaar.  Resident can register their profile in an App installed in any smartphone. However the OTP will be sent to only their registered mobile. 	episode_done:True
text:Can the Registrar add / remove Introducers at a later stage?	labels:Yes, Registrars can add / remove / modify Introducers at a later stage. The area of operations of an Introducer can also be modified at a later stage. UIDAI encourages Registrars to review performance of Introducers on an on-going basis and make changes to the list as required.	episode_done:True
text:How can a person's Date of Birth be validated?	labels:As per the DDSVP Committee report, a flag is maintained in Aadhaar database to indicate if Date of Birth (DoB) is verified or declared.	episode_done:True
text:What information is required to be provided by an individual to get Aadhaar?	labels:Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016 provides for demographic and biometrics information required during Aadhaar enrolment process as per the details given below: Demographic information required - Name Date of BirthGender Address Parent/Guardian details (required for minor)Contact details phone and email (optional)   Biometric Information required - Photo10 finger printsIrisThe UIDAI set up the Demographic data standards and verification procedure committee under the Chairmanship of Shri N. Vittal to define the data fields to be collected by the UIDAI and the verification process to be followed. The Data Standards Committee submitted its report on December 9, 2009. The full report is available at https://uidai.gov.in/images/UID_DDSVP_Committee_Report_v1.0.pdf. UIDAI also set up the Biometrics standards committee under the Chairmanship of Dr B.K Gairola (Director General, National Informatics Centre) to define the standards and the nature of biometric data that is required to be captured. The report of the Biometrics standards committee was submitted on January 7, 2010 and is available at  https://uidai.gov.in/images/resource/Biometric_Standards_Committee_Notification.pdf 	episode_done:True
text:Will getting Aadhaar be compulsory?	labels:Residents who are eligible for Aadhaar can apply for Aadhaar as per the provisions of the Aadhaar Act and the Regulations framed thereunder. Similarly, agencies providing benefits and services may choose to use Aadhaar in their systems and may require that their beneficiaries or customers provide their Aadhaar for these services.	episode_done:True
text:What are the features and benefits of Aadhaar?	labels:One Aadhaar: Aadhaar is a unique number, and no resident can have a duplicate number since it is linked to their individual biometrics; thereby identifying fake and ghost identities which result in leakages today. Savings from eliminating duplicates and fakes through Aadhaar-based identification will further enable governments to expand benefits to other eligible residents.Portability: Aadhaar is a universal number, and agencies and services can contact the central Unique Identification database from anywhere in the country to authenticate a beneficiary's identity by availing authentication services.  Inclusion of those without any existing identity documents: A problem in reaching benefits to poor and marginalized residents is that they often lack the identification documents they need to receive State benefits; the "Introducer" system which has been approved for data verification for the UIDAI will enable such residents to establish an identity. Electronic benefit transfers: The UID-enabled-Bank-Account network will offer a secure and low cost platform to directly remit benefits to residents without the heavy costs associated today with benefit distribution; the leakages in the current system will also be stemmed as a result.Aadhaar-based authentication to confirm entitlement delivered to the beneficiary: The UIDAI will offer online authentication services for agencies who wish to validate a resident's identity; this service will enable confirmation of the entitlement actually reaching the intended beneficiary. Improved services through increased transparency: Clear accountability and transparent monitoring would significantly improve access and quality of entitlements to beneficiaries and the agency alike. Self-service puts residents in control: Using Aadhaar as an authentication mechanism, residents should be able to access up-to-date information about their entitlements, demand services and redress their grievances directly from their mobile phone, kiosks or other means. In the case of self-service on the resident's mobile, security is assured using two-factor authentication (i.e. by proving possession of the resident's registered Mobile Number and knowledge of the resident's Aadhaar PIN). These standards are compliant with the Reserve Bank of India's approved standards for Mobile Banking and Payments.	episode_done:True
text:What is Aadhaar?	labels:Aadhaar is a 12-digit unique identity number that can be obtained by residents of India, based on their biometric and demographic data. The process for Aadhaar enrolment of resident of the country involves use of certain basic demographic information combined with ten finger prints, both irises and photograph to uniquely identify a resident through a process of de-duplication. An Aadhaar number issued to an individual shall not be reassigned to any other individual. An Aadhaar number shall be a random number and bear no relation to the attributes or identity of the Aadhaar number holder. No resident can have a duplicate number since it is linked to their individual biometrics; thereby identifying fake and ghost identities. 	episode_done:True
text:How does the UIDAI protect the individual and their information?	labels:Protection of the individual, and the safeguarding their information is inherent in the design of the UID project. From having a random number which does not reveal anything about the individual to other features listed below, the UID project keeps the interest of the resident at the core of its purpose and objectives. Collecting limited information: Data collected by the UIDAI is purely to issue Aadhaar, and confirm the identity of Aadhaar holders. The UIDAI is collecting basic data fields in order to be able to establish identity this includes Name, Date of Birth, Gender, Address, Parent/ Guardian's name essential for children but not for others, mobile number and email id is optional as well . The UIDAI is collecting biometric information to establish uniqueness therefore collecting photo, 10 finger prints and iris. No profiling and tracking information collected: The UIDAI policy bars it from collecting sensitive personal information such as religion, caste, community, class, ethnicity, income and health. The profiling of individuals is therefore not possible through the UID system, since the data collected is limited to that required for identification and identity confirmation. The UIDAI had in fact, dropped the place of birth data field part of the initial list of information it planned to collect based on feedback from CSOs that it could lead to profiling. The UIDAI also does not collect any transaction records of the individual. The records of an individual confirming their identity through Aadhaar will only reflect that such a confirmation happened. This limited information will be retained for a short period time in the interest of the resident, to resolve any disputes. Release of information - yes or no response: The UIDAI is barred from revealing personal information in Aadhaar database the only response permitted is yes or no to requests to verify an identity The only exceptions are the order of a High court , or the order of a secretary, in case of national security . This is a reasonable exception and is clear and precise. This approach is also in line with security norms followed in US and Europe on access to data in case of a security threat. Data protection and privacy: The UIDAI has the obligation to ensure the security and confidentiality of the data collected . The data will be collected on software provided by the UIDAI and encrypted to prevent leaks in transit. Trained and certified enrollers will collect the information, who will not have access to the data being collected. The UIDAI has a comprehensive security policy to ensure the safety and integrity of its data. It will publish more details on this, including the Information Security Plan and Policies for the CIDR and mechanisms for auditing the compliance of the UIDAI and its contracting agencies. In addition, there will be strict security and storage protocols in place. Penalties for any security violation will be severe, and include penalties for disclosing identity information . There are penal consequences for unauthorised access to CIDR including hacking , and penalties for tampering with data in the CIDR under the Aadhaar Act, 2016 . Convergence and linking of UIDAI information to other databases: The UID database is not linked to any other databases, or to information held in other databases. Its only purpose will be to verify a person's identity at the point of receiving a service, and that too with the consent of Aadhaar holder. The UID database will be guarded both physically and electronically by a few select individuals with high clearance. It will not be available even for many members of the UID staff and will be secured with the best encryption, and in a highly secure data vault. All access details will be properly logged. 	episode_done:True
text:How is Aadhaar different from any other identity issued by the government?	labels:Aadhaar is a unique 12 digit random number assigned to a resident which is apart from offline or physical  verification, verifiable online anywhere anytime using the Aadhaar authentication platform. Aadhaar authentication responds only with “yes/no” answer. The Aadhaar Scheme is primarily aimed at improving the delivery of social security benefits and subsidies, plugging leakages and wastes, eliminating fakes and duplicates and enhancing transparency and accountability. 	episode_done:True
text:What use can aadhaar be put to? What are the Aadhaar enabled applications? How a resident gets benefited through Aadhaar enabled applications?	labels:Aadhaar means foundation, therefore it is the base on which any delivery system can be built. Aadhaar can be used in any system which needs to establish the identity of a resident and/or provide secure access for the resident to services/benefits offered by the system. Aadhaar can be used in the delivery of the following programs:   Food & Nutrition – Public Distribution System, Food Security, Mid Day Meals, Integrated Child Development Scheme. Employment – Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana, Indira Awaaz Yojana, Prime Minister’s Employment Guarantee Program Education – Sarva Shikhsha Abhiyaan, Right to Education (Children between 6 to 14 years under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, likewise, shall not require mandatory Aadhaar enrolment)  Inclusion & Social Security – Janani Suraksha Yojana, Development of Primitive Tribe Groups, Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme Healthcare – Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, Janashri Bima Yojana, Aam Aadmi Bima Yojana Other miscellaneous purposes including Property Transactions, VoterID, PAN Card etc. 	episode_done:True
text:What are the possible criminal penalties envisaged against the fraud or unauthorized access to data?	labels:Following are the possible criminal penalties in the Bill:   Impersonation by providing false demographic or biometric information is an offence – imprisonment for 3 years and a fine of Rs. 10,000.  Appropriating the identity of an Aadhaar number holder by changing or attempting to change the demographic and biometric information of an Aadhaar number holder is an offence - imprisonment for 3 years and a fine of Rs. 10,000.  Pretending to be an agency authorized to collect Identity information of a resident is an offence – imprisonment for 3 years and a fine of Rs. 10,000 for a person, and Rs. 1 lakh for a company. Intentionally transmitting information collected during enrolment and authentication to an unauthorized person is an offence – imprisonment for 3 years and a fine of Rs. 10,000 for a person, and Rs. 1lakh for a company. Unauthorized access to the central identities data repository (CIDR) and hacking is an offence – imprisonment for 10 years and a fine of Rs. 1 crore. Tampering with the central identities data repository is an offence – imprisonment for10 years and a fine of Rs. 10,000. Providing biometrics that is not one’s own is an offence – imprisonment for 3 years and of Rs. 10,000.  Following are the Civil Penalties:  Penalty for failure to comply with provisions of this Act, rules, regulations and directions [Section 33A] – upto Rs. 1 crore for each contravention. Power to Adjudicate [Section 33B] – by Adjudicating Officer, not below the rank of JS, appointed by the Authority. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal [Section33C] – the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal. Procedures and Powers of Appellate Tribunal [Section 33D] - sections 14-I to 14K (both inclusive), 16 and 17 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997. Appeal to Supreme Court of India [Section 33E] Civil Court not to have jurisdiction [Section 33F]  	episode_done:True
text:What are the Data protection and privacy measures taken by UIDAI ?	labels:The UIDAI has the obligation to ensure the security and confidentiality of the data collected. The data will be collected on software provided by the UIDAI and encrypted to prevent leaks in transit. The UIDAI has a comprehensive security policy to ensure the safety and integrity of its data. There are security and storage protocols in place. UIDAI has published guidelines in this regard which is available on its website. Penalties for any security violation will be severe, and include penalties for disclosing identity information. There are civil and criminal penal consequences for unauthorised access to CIDR – including hacking, and penalties for tampering with data in the CIDR. 	episode_done:True
text:What are the privacy protections in place to protect the right to privacy of the resident?	labels:Protection of the individual and the safeguarding their information is inherent in the design of the UID project. From having a random number which does not reveal anything about the individual to other features listed below, the UID project keeps the interest of the resident at the core of its purpose and objectives.    Collecting limited informationThe UIDAI is collecting only basic data fields - Name, Date of Birth, Gender, Address, Parent/ Guardian’s (name essential for children but not for others) photo, 10 finger prints and iris scan.  No profiling and tracking information collectedThe UIDAI policy bars it from collecting sensitive personal information such as religion, caste, community, class, ethnicity, income and health. The profiling of individuals is therefore not possible through the UID system.  Release of information – yes or no responseThe UIDAI will not reveal personal information in the Aadhaar database – the only response will be a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to requests to verify an identity  Convergence and linking of UIDAI information to other databasesThe UID database is not linked to any other databases, or to information held in other databases. Its only purpose will be to verify a person’s identity at the point of receiving a service, and that too with the consent of the aadhaar number holderThe UID database will be guarded both physically and electronically by a few select individuals with high clearance. The data will be secured with the best encryption, and in a highly secure data vault. All access details will be properly logged. 	episode_done:True
text:Can the resident’s data be purged from Aadhaar database?	labels:As is the case with the other services availed from the government, there is no provision for purging the data of the resident from the database once he has obtained his Aadhaar. The data is also required as it is used for de-duplication of every new entrant in the database against all the existing records to establish the uniqueness of the resident. Only after this process is completed that the Aadhaar is assigned.	episode_done:True
text:Can a resident opt out of Aadhaar?	labels:The resident has the option in the first instance not to enrol for Aadhaar at all. Aadhaar is a service delivery tool, and not designed for any other purpose. Aadhaar being unique to every resident is non-transferable. If the resident does not wish to use the Aadhaar, it will remain dormant, as the use is based on the physical presence and biometric authentication of the person. However, children, within 6 months of attaining majority, may make an application for cancellation of their Aadhaar as per the provisions of the Aadhaar Act, 2016 and rules and regulations framed there under. 	episode_done:True
text:How will the grievances of the resident be addressed?	labels:The UIDAI will set up a Contact Centre to manage all queries and grievances and serve as a single point of contact for the organization. The details of the Contact Centre will be published on the website as and when enrolment begins.  The users of this system are expected to be residents, registrars and enrolment agencies.  Any resident seeking enrolment is given a printed acknowledgement form with an Enrolment Number, that enables the resident to make queries about her/his enrolment status through any communication channel of the contact centre.  Each enrolment agency will be given a unique code that will also enable faster and pointed access to the Contact Centre that includes a technical helpdesk.	episode_done:True
text:Who will have access to the UID database? How will the security of the database be ensured?	labels:  Residents who have aadhaar numbers will be entitled to access their own information stored in the UID database.  CIDR operations will be follow strict access protocols to limit access to the database.  The database itself will be secured against hacking and other forms of cyberattacks. 	episode_done:True
text:How does the UIDAI protect the individual and their information?	labels:Protection of the individual, and the safeguarding their information is inherent in the design of the UID project. From having a random number which does not reveal anything about the individual to other features listed below, the UID project keeps the interest of the resident at the core of its purpose and objectives.    Collecting limited informationData collected by the UIDAI is purely to issue Aadhaar numbers, and confirm the identity of Aadhaar number holders. The UIDAI is collecting basic data fields in order to be able to establish identity– this includes Name, Date of Birth, Gender, Address, Parent/ Guardian’s name essential for children but not for others, mobile number and email id is optional as well . The UIDAI is collecting biometric information to establish uniqueness – therefore collecting photo, 10 finger prints and iris.  No profiling and tracking information collected The UIDAI policy bars it from collecting sensitive personal information such as religion, caste, community, class, ethnicity, income and health. The profiling of individuals is therefore not possible through the UID system, since the data collected is limited to that required for identification and identity confirmation. The UIDAI had in fact, dropped the ‘place of birth’ data field – part of the initial list of information it planned to collect – based on feedback from CSOs that it could lead to profiling. The UIDAI also does not collect any transaction records of the individual. The records of an individual confirming their identity through Aadhaar will only reflect that such a confirmation happened. This limited information will be retained for a short period time in the interest of the resident, to resolve any disputes.   Release of information – yes or no response The UIDAI is barred from revealing personal information in the Aadhaar database – the only response permitted are a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to requests to verify an identity. The only exceptions are the order of a court, or the order of a joint secretary, in case of national security. This is a reasonable exception and is clear and precise. This approach is also in line with security norms followed in US and Europe on access to data in case of a security threat.  Data protection and privacyThe UIDAI has the obligation to ensure the security and confidentiality of the data collected. The data will be collected on software provided by the UIDAI and encrypted to prevent leaks in transit. Trained and certified enrollers will collect the information, which will not have access to the data being collected.The UIDAI has a comprehensive security policy to ensure the safety and integrity of its data. It will publish more details on this, including the Information Security Plan and Policies for the CIDR and mechanisms for auditing the compliance of the UIDAI and its contracting agencies. In addition, there will be strict security and storage protocols in place. Penalties for any security violation will be severe, and include penalties for disclosing identity information. There will also be penal consequences for unauthorised access to CIDR – including hacking, and penalties for tampering with data in the CIDR.  Convergence and linking of UIDAI information to other databases The UID database is not linked to any other databases, or to information held in other databases. Its only purpose will be to verify a person’s identity at the point of receiving a service, and that too with the consent of the aadhaar number holder. The UID database will be guarded both physically and electronically by a few select individuals with high clearance. It will not be available even for many members of the UID staff and will be secured with the best encryption, and in a highly secure data vault. All access details will be properly logged. 	episode_done:True
text: Can an NRI apply for Aadhaar? 	labels:YES. An NRI (whether minor or adult) with a valid Indian Passport can apply for Aadhaar from any Aadhaar Kendra. 	episode_done:True
text:Can my passport be used for Aadhaar update of my spouse?	labels:If your passport has the name of your spouse, then it can be used as Proof of Address for them. 	episode_done:True
text:I am an NRI and I have an Aadhaar. Can my spouse be enrolled based on my Aadhaar & passport?	labels: If spouse is NRI - valid Indian passport of the applicant is mandatory as Proof of Identity (PoI). If spouse is an Indian resident (not NRI) – any valid Proof of Relationship document (refer: https://uidai.gov.in/images/commdoc/valid_documents_list.pdf) including your Passport (having name of your spouse) can be used for enrolment under Head of Family (HoF). 	episode_done:True
text:What is the process for Aadhaar enrolment for children of NRIs?	labels:Pls refer to the below: Child is below 5 years of age:  One of the parents/ guardian has to authenticate on behalf of the child and also give consent for enrolment of the minor by signing the enrolment form. If the child is an NRI - valid Indian passport of the child is mandatory as Proof of Identity (PoI) If the child is an Indian resident (not NRI) - any valid Proof of Relationship document (refer: https://uidai.gov.in/images/commdoc/valid_documents_list.pdf) such as Birth Certificate, along with Aadhaar of the parent/ guardian, can be used for enrolment. Child is between 5 to 18 years of age:  One of the parents/ guardian has to give consent for enrolment of the minor by signing the enrolment form. If the minor is an NRI – valid Indian passport of the child is mandatory as Proof of Identity (PoI) If the minor is an Indian resident (not NRI) -   No document in the name of the minor: any valid Proof of Relationship document (refer: https://uidai.gov.in/images/commdoc/valid_documents_list.pdf) such as Birth certificate can be used for enrolment under Head of Family. Minor has a document: use a valid Proof of Identity (PoI) and Proof of Address (PoA) document (like School ID card) in the child’s name for enrolment (refer: https://uidai.gov.in/images/commdoc/valid_documents_list.pdf). 	episode_done:True
text:Can I give an International mobile number in my Aadhaar details?	labels:Currently, we do not support international/ non-Indian mobile numbers. 	episode_done:True
text:The address in my passport is not updated. I want to give my present address for my Aadhaar application. Is that possible?	labels:YES. A valid Indian Passport is mandatory as a Proof of Identity (PoI) for NRI applicants. You may choose to give any other Indian Address with a valid supporting Proof of Address (PoA) as per the list of documents acceptable by UIDAI: https://uidai.gov.in/images/commdoc/valid_documents_list.pdf 	episode_done:True
text:What is the process for NRI enrolment?	labels:The process is:  Visit any Aadhaar Kendra of your convenience. Carry valid Indian Passport with you Fill details in the enrolment form Giving Email ID is mandatory for NRI The declaration for NRI enrolment is slightly different. Read and sign the same in your enrolment form Ask the operator to enroll you as NRI Give your Passport as Proof of Identity You may choose to use your Passport itself as Proof of Address and Date of Birth proof or give some other valid document/s for this (As per https://uidai.gov.in/images/commdoc/valid_documents_list.pdf) Complete the biometric capture process Check all details on screen (in English and local language) before you allow the operator to submit Collect the acknowledgement slip/ enrolment slip that has your 14 digit Enrolment ID and Date & Time Stamp. You can check status of your Aadhaar from: https://resident.uidai.gov.in/check-aadhaar  	episode_done:True
text:I have Enroled for Aadhaar number but I am yet to receive the Aadhaar number, Can I still file my Income tax return?	labels:Yes, you can quote the EID number mentioned on Acknowledgement/ EID slip provided by the enrolment centre at the time of enrolment while filing the Income Tax return.	episode_done:True
text:Is it mandatory to enrol for Aadhaar to apply for PAN in India? If yes, then what is the process for NRIs?	labels:Section 139AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961 as introduced by the Finance Act, 2017 provides for mandatory quoting of Aadhaar /Enrolment ID of Aadhaar application form, for filing of return of income and for making an application for allotment of Permanent Account Number with effect from July 1’ 2017. Mandatory quoting of Aadhaar or Enrolment ID will apply only to a person who is eligible to obtain Aadhaar number. As per the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016, only a resident individual is entitled to obtain Aadhaar. Resident as per the said Act means an individual who has resided in India for a period or periods amounting in all to 182 days or more in the 12 months immediately preceding the date of application for enrolment. 	episode_done:True
text:Will my PAN become non-functional if I do not link it to Aadhaar?	labels:UIDAI only issues Aadhaar and provides means to authenticate the same. For any product or scheme related queries, we request you to please get in touch with respective product/scheme owner. For PAN related queries, you are requested to please contact with Income Tax department.	episode_done:True
text:I do not have any Date of Birth proof. How do I update the DoB in Aadhaar or PAN to complete the linking?	labels:In Aadhaar, if the resident provides documentary evidence of Date of Birth, then the Date of Birth is considered as “Verified”. When resident declares the DoB without any documentary evidence, then date of birth is considered as “Declared”.	episode_done:True
text:My date of birth in PAN and Aadhaar do not match. Not able to link them. Pls help?	labels:You will have to correct your date of birth, either with Aadhaar or with PAN to link both. In-case linking problem still persists, we request you to please get in touch with Income Tax department.	episode_done:True
text:My name is different in PAN and Aadhaar. It is not allowing me to link both. What to do?	labels:In order to Link Aadhaar with PAN, ideally your demographic details (i.e. Name, Gender and Date of Birth) should match in both the documents. In case of any minor mismatch in Aadhaar Name provided by taxpayer when compared to the actual data in Aadhaar, One Time Password (Aadhaar OTP) will be sent to the mobile registered with Aadhaar. Taxpayers should ensure that the date of birth and gender in PAN and Aadhaar are exactly same. In a rare case where Aadhaar name is completely different from name in PAN, then the linking will fail and taxpayer will be prompted to change the name in either Aadhaar or in PAN database. Note: For PAN data update related queries you may visit: https://www.utiitsl.com. For Aadhaar update related information you may visit UIDAI official website: www.uidai.gov.in In-case linking problem still persists you are requested to visit Income Tax official website or call IT department helpline. 	episode_done:True
text:I am already having a PAN number which I am quoting for filing of Income Tax return. Do I still need to quote Aadhaar number?	labels:Yes, Permanent account numbers (PAN) not linked to Aadhaar number will likely become invalid after 30th June 2018	episode_done:True
text:Has the government made it mandatory to quote Aadhaar number for filing Income Tax returns?	labels:Yes, Section 139AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961 as introduced by the Finance Act, 2017 provides for mandatory quoting of Aadhaar /Enrolment ID of Aadhaar application form, for filing of return of income.	episode_done:True
text:Where can I enrol for Aadhaar?	labels:You have to visit an Aadhaar Enrolment centre set up by Enrolment Agency to enrol for Aadhaar. You can also search nearest Enrolment centre by clicking on “Locate Enrolment Center” or https://appointments.uidai.gov.in/easearch.aspx . You have to enter State, District and locality for finding the nearest enrolment centre. 	episode_done:True
text:What are the documents required for enrolment for Aadhaar?	labels:You need to fill up an application form available at Enrolment centre along with supporting documents which are Proof of Identity (PoI), Proof of Address (PoA), Proof of Relationship (PoR) and Date of Birth(DoB) document. UIDAI accepts 31 PoI and 44 PoA , 14 PoR and 14 DoB documents. View the nationally valid list of supporting documents. 	episode_done:True
text:Do I need to bring original documents for Aadhaar enrolment?	labels:Yes, you need to bring original copies of supporting documents for Aadhaar enrolment. These original copies will be scanned and handed back to you after the enrolment. 	episode_done:True
text:Do I have to pay any fee for Aadhaar enrolment?	labels:No, Aadhaar enrolment is totally free of cost therefore you need not pay anything at the enrolment centre. 	episode_done:True
text:What kind of data gets captured during Aadhaar Enrolment?	labels:There are two types of data gets captured for Aadhaar enrolment i.e. Demographic (Name, Gender, DoB, Address, Mobile number and email id) & Bioemtric (10 Finger Prints, Both Iris and photograph). Mobile number and email id are optional. 	episode_done:True
text:Is there any online method of getting Enroled for Aadhaar?	labels:No, you have to personally visit Aadhaar enrolment centre for getting yourself Enroled as your Biometrics will be captured. 	episode_done:True
text:Can I get myself Enroled for Aadhaar just by sending required documents by Post?	labels:No, you have to personally visit Aadhaar enrolment centre for getting yourself Enroled as your Biometrics will be captured. 	episode_done:True
text:What if my demographic details mentioned on acknowledgement / enrolment slip are not matching with supporting documents?	labels:You can get your details corrected within 96 hours of your enrolment. 96 hours window starts from the time stamp mentioned on your Enrolment Slip/ Acknowledgement slip. 	episode_done:True
text:Can I get Enroled for Aadhaar if any of my fingers or iris is missing?	labels:Yes, you can enrol for Aadhaar even if any or all fingers / Iris are missing. Aadhaar software has provisions to handle such exceptions. 	episode_done:True
text:Is it mandatory to provide mobile number or email for Aadhaar enrolment?	labels:No, it is not mandatory to provide mobile number or email for Aadhaar enrolment. But it is always recommended to provide mobile number and email so that you get updates regarding your Aadhaar application status. 	episode_done:True
text:Is there any age limit for Aadhaar enrolment?	labels:No, there is no age limit defined for Aadhaar Enrolment. Even a new born baby can also get Enroled for Aadhaar. 	episode_done:True
text:How much time it takes to get my Aadhaar generated after the enrolment?	labels:It takes up to 90 days for Aadhaar generation from the date of enrolment. 	episode_done:True
text:Can I get my Aadhaar letter downloaded online after it is generated?	labels:Yes, once your Aadhaar is generated, you can always download e-Aadhaar letter by clicking on “Download Aadhaar” under Aadhaar Enrolment section on uidai.gov.in website. 	episode_done:True
text:Does the online downloaded Aadhaar letter have same validity as that of original?	labels:Yes, online downloaded e-Aadhaar letter has the same validity as that of original. 	episode_done:True
text:I have lost my Enrolment ID slip/ Aadhaar letter, is there any way of finding the same?	labels:Yes, In case your mobile number is registered in Aadhaar, you can find your Enrolment number (EID) or Aadhaar (UID) by clicking on “Retrieve Lost UID/EID” tab under Section Aadhaar enrolment on uidai.gov.in website or https://resident.uidai.gov.in/lost-uideid. Select EID/UID you want to retrieve and then enter your name and mobile number (as registered during Aadhaar enrolment). You will receive your EID/ Aadhaar number delivered on your email/ mobile number. In case your mobile number is not registered in Aadhaar, you have to visit nearest Permanent Aadhaar Enrolment centre. 	episode_done:True
text:I have Enroled for Aadhaar multiple times but have not received my Aadhaar letter. What should I do in this case?	labels:There are chances that your Aadhaar has been generated but you have not received Aadhaar letter by post. In this case, it is recommended to get your Aadhaar status checked, for all your EIDs, by clicking on “Check Aadhaar Status” or https://resident.uidai.gov.in/check-aadhaar or by visiting nearest Permanent Aadhaar Enrolment centre. 	episode_done:True
text:I have received SMS on my mobile that my Aadhaar is rejected, what should I do?	labels:Aadhaar generation involves various quality checks therefore there are chances that your Aadhaar gets rejected due to quality or any other technical reason. So if you have received SMS that your Aadhaar has been rejected, it is recommended to re-enrol yourself. 	episode_done:True
text:I don’t have required documents for enrolment of Aadhaar, can I still enroll?	labels:Yes, even if someone in a family does not have required documents, the resident can still enrol if his/her name exists in family entitlement document. In this case the Head of Family in entitlement document needs to be Enroled first with valid PoI & PoA document and then other family members can enrol based on EID/Aadhaar number of head of family. UIDAI accepts 8 document types as Proof of Relationship (PoR). View the list of supporting documents. 	episode_done:True
text:What are Resident’s responsibilities in ensuring that his/her enrolment does not get rejected?	labels:Resident must review his/her details in English as well as in local language by looking at the resident screen available in front of him/her. Ensure that Name, Gender, DoB, Address etc. are correct. Also to ensure that no titles/ salutations like Mr./ Mrs./ Col./ Dr. etc. are prefixed or suffixed to the name. It is recommended to provide full name instead of initials for e.g. B.K Sharma should be written as Brij Kumar Sharma. Review that photograph captured by the operator is correct and recognizable. 	episode_done:True
text:Whether the Ration card NEREGA Card etc can be accepted as Valid Proof of Identity/Address for the family members listed in the document in case they do not have separate PoI or PoA document?	labels:Yes. The family entitlement documents is accepted as proof of Identity/Address for family enrolments as long as the head of the family whose photograph appears on the documents presents and verifies the identity and address of the family members and the Registrar authorized verifier countersigns the copy of the document as proof of acknowledgement. 	episode_done:True
text:Whether UIDAI has defined process to be followed for Family enrolments?	labels:Yes. Head of the Family should invariably bring the original POI/POA for verification and only those family members can be Enroled based on the family entitlement document, whose names & other details are recorded on it. For family enrolments it is desirable that the family should come together for enrolment as far as possible. In case all the members cannot make it on the same day then the head of family should invariably accompany the family member whenever he/she comes for the enrolment. 	episode_done:True
text:What is the option if the address indicated on the PoA document appears to be inadequate for postal delivery? Can additional information from the residents be accepted?	labels:Yes. The resident may be allowed to add minor fields such as House No., Lane No., Street Name, correcting typographic errors, minor changes/ corrections to pin code etc. to the address listed in the PoA document as long as these additions/modifications do not alter the base address mentioned in the PoA document. If the changes requested are substantial and change the base address that is listed in the PoA, the resident will require to provide an alternate PoA or enrol through an Introducer. 	episode_done:True
text:Where multiple address proofs are available for a resident (eg. present and native), which proof would UIDAI accept, and where will it send Aadhaar Letter?	labels:The UIDAI asks the resident to confirm the addresses (from the multiple address proof) on which he/ she wants his/ her Aadhaar letter to be delivered. Based on resident’s choice, UIDAI captures the detail as per supporting documents. 	episode_done:True
text:Can I get my Aadhaar letter download online after updation?	labels:Yes, you can download your e-Aadhaar online once your request is approved. You can download your e-Aadhaar by clicking “Download Aadhaar” on uidai.gov.in. 	episode_done:True
text:Shall I get Aadhaar letter again after updation?	labels:Aadhaar letter with updates will be delivered at the given address only in case of Updation in Name, Address, Date of Birth and Gender. For Update of Mobile number/Email ID, the notification will be sent on the given mobile number/email ID.	episode_done:True
text:How much time it takes to get updation in Aadhaar?	labels:It takes upto 90 days for updation in Aadhaar after the request.	episode_done:True
text:Is there any method of updating Biometrics online or by post?	labels:No, for all Biometric updates including photograph you have to personally visit nearest Aadhaar Permanent Enrolment centre.	episode_done:True
text:Can I update Biometrics (Finger Prints/ Iris/photograph) in Aadhaar?	labels:Yes, you can update your Biometrics (Finger Prints/ Iris/photograph) in Aadhaar. For Biometrics updates, you need to visit nearest Permanent Enrolment centre.	episode_done:True
text:Does submission of request guarantee Updation of information?	labels:Submission of information for update does not guarantee update of Aadhaar data. The information submitted is subject to verification and validation. Furnishing of incorrect information/suppression of information would lead to rejection of application.	episode_done:True
text:I have lost my mobile number/ do not possess the number that I Enroled with in Aadhaar. How should I submit my Update request?	labels:In case you have lost/do not possess the mobile number anymore that is registered in Aadhaar, have to personally visit the nearest Aadhaar update centre for updation of mobile number. In this case you cannot update mobile number through post or online.	episode_done:True
text:I have my mobile number registered in Aadhaar but I want to replace it with my second number. Can I update it online?	labels:No, Mobile number is not updated online. To update mobile number, you can visit nearest Permanent Enrolment centre.	episode_done:True
text:Do I need to visit same enrolment centre for updation also where my original enrolment was done?	labels:No, you can visit any of the permanent Enrolment centre for updation.	episode_done:True
text:Will my Aadhaar number get changed after updation?	labels:No, your Aadhaar number will remain same throughout even after update.	episode_done:True
text:How can I submit my Supporting documents in case of online Self Service Update portal (SSUP)?	labels:In case you are using online Self Service Update portal (SSUP) method of updation, you need to upload scan of original documents.	episode_done:True
text:Do I need to bring original documents for updation at Enrolment centre?	labels:Yes, you need to bring original documents for updation at enrolment centre. Original documents will be scanned and handed back to you after updation.	episode_done:True
text:What details can I get updated in case I am using online Self Service Update (SSUP) portal for updation?	labels:If you are using online Self Service Update Portal (SSUP) for updation, you can update your Demographic details (Address). Please ensure that your mobile number is registered in Aadhaar while using this service.	episode_done:True
text:What details can I get updated in case I am visiting Permanent Enrolment centre for updation?	labels:In case you are visiting Permanent Enrolment centre, you can get both Demographics (Name, Address, DoB, Gender, Mobile & Email) & Biometrics (Finger Prints, Iris & Photograph).	episode_done:True
text:Is it necessary that my mobile number should be registered with Aadhaar while requesting for any kind of updation?	labels:If you are using online Self Service Update Portal (SSUP) for updation, your mobile number should be registered with Aadhaar otherwise you can visit nearest Permanent Enrolment centre with Supporting documents.	episode_done:True
text:How can I update my details in Aadhaar?	labels:There are 2 different ways you can get your details updated:-  By Visiting Permanent Enrolment centre. Search nearest enrolment centre by clicking on “Locate Enrolment Center” on uidai.gov.in.  Online using Self Service Update Portal (SSUP). Click “Update Your Address Online” on uidai.gov.in. 	episode_done:True
text:Is there any fee involved for updation in Aadhaar details?	labels:Yes, for updation in Aadhaar, either Demographic or Biometric, you have to pay Rs. 50/- (including taxes) to the service provider each time you get your details updated. You can also click on “Charges for Various UIDAI Services at Aadhaar Kendra (PEC)” on uidai.gov.in for UIDAI approved Fee Structure 	episode_done:True
text:What are the documents required for updation in Aadhaar details?	labels:View the list of supporting documents. List contains 32 Proof of Identity (PoI), 45 Proof of Address (PoA), 14 Proof of Relationship (PoR) and 15 Proof of Date of Birth documents. 	episode_done:True
text:What fields can I update in Aadhaar?	labels:You can update Demographic details (Name, Address, DoB, Gender, Mobile Number, Email) as well as Biometrics (Finger Prints, Iris & Photograph) in Aadhaar.	episode_done:True
text:Can I update my details in Aadhaar?	labels:Yes, you can always update your details in Aadhaar.	episode_done:True
text:What are the Liabilities of an Introducer?	labels:  Introducer must not collude with a person to impersonate another person (dead or alive) at the time of enrolment. Introducer must not help an Aadhaar holder to deliberately take on the identity of another person by changing their demographic information or even collude to provide false biometric information. Strict action will be taken against the Introducer for violation of guidelines.  	episode_done:True
text:What are the Responsibility of an Introducer?	labels:  Once the Registrar identifies introducers region-wise (District/State in which the Introducer is authorized to work), he will notify the Introducers. The Introducers must attend the Aadhaar awareness workshop organized by the Registrar and UIDAI to acquaint them with the Aadhaar program and understand Introducer responsibilities and liabilities. If the identified Introducer is ready to work as an Introducer, he/she will have to give a written consent to being an Introducer for the purpose of enabling Aadhaar enrolments and to follow the guidelines and procedures laid down for the Introducers by the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) and the Registrar. Introducers need to be Enroled and must have received their Aadhaar numbers and signed the consent forms before they start introducing residents in the field. They must ensure that the Registrar has registered and activated them as an Introducer at UIDAI. Introducers must keep themselves informed on the Enrolment Schedules, Enrolment Centre locations and operational hours of the Enrolment Centers in their assigned territory. They must ensure that their contact information is correctly displayed at the Enrolment Centre. In case of no display/incorrect information, ask the Enrolment Centre supervisor to display/correct the details. Introducer must be easily accessible to the residents. The Introducers must check the Resident’s Name and Address on the Enrolment form for correctness and completeness. Introducer should also check his/her own details in the form and then provide his/her signature/thumbprint on the Enrolment Form space provided. Introducers should make themselves available during the working hours of the EC for endorsing residents. In case, they are not available during the operational hours, they can visit the Enrolment Centre at the End of the Day and check the list of residents pending for their endorsement. Introducer must carefully check the Name and Address details of the Resident and provide their Approval/Rejection. Introducer has to provide their biometric on Aadhaar client to endorse a resident’s enrolment. The Introducer also signs/provide thumbprint on the consent for enrolment where consent print requires the same. Introducer confirms the identity and address of the resident they are introducing Introducer must only introduce residents who do not have documentary proof of identity or address Introducer is not obliged to introduce every person who approaches them Introducer cannot charge fees for introducing residents. However, Registrars can prescribe an honorarium to them for this work.  	episode_done:True
text:Who is an Introducer?	labels:  Introducers are individuals (for example, Registrar’s employees, elected local body members, members of local administrative bodies, postmen, influencers such as teachers, health workers & doctors, Aanganwadi / ASHA workers, representative of local NGO’s etc.) identified by a Registrar and registered in UIDAI’s CIDR as “Introducers”. In certain cases, the UIDAI Regional Office may itself take the initiative to identify a pool of Introducers for the convenience of the Registrars. Introducer must be above the age of 18 years and Introducer must not have a criminal record. Introducers will be linked to a Registrar. The same Introducer may be used by more than one Registrar as long as they are identified by the concerned Registrar and registered in UIDAI’s CIDR as “Introducers” for the particular Registrar. Therefore, the Introducer can only introduce people within the Registrar’s jurisdiction. In addition, a Registrar can further limit the operations of an Introducer by administrative boundaries (State, district level).  	episode_done:True
text:How are Residents without documents Enroled in Aadhaar?	labels:  Key demographic data needs to be verified properly at the time of enrolment. Residents can bring any of the approved documents as Proof of Identity (PoI) and Proof of Address (PoA). If a resident is unable to provide documentary proof of identity or proof of address, they can be Enroled through a pre-designated “Introducer” who is identified and notified by the Registrar or Regional Offices. An Introducer is a person who is authorized by the Registrar to introduce a resident who does not possess any PoA/PoI documents. This introduction does not tantamount to giving a character certificate to resident.  	episode_done:True
text:What are the UIDAI Guidelines for Verification that the Verifier must keep in mind while verifying the Documents?	labels:  Make sure that the resident has original documents for verification. In instances where original documents are not available, copies attested / certified by a public notary / gazetted officer will be accepted. The documents produced by the resident for Aadhaar enrolment/Update must be in the list of approved documents only. The format is for certificate to be issued by officials/ institutions (only those that are recognised in the UIDAI’s valid list of documents) for Proof of Identity and Address is as per Appendix A/B. Verifier can refuse verification, if they suspect forged/altered documents. In cases where Verifier refuses verification of the documents produced, reasons should be recorded in brief by the Verifier on the Enrolment Form. In case the Verifier refuses verification with reasons or turns the resident back without recording any reasons, the resident can approach a designated Authority created by the Registrar at the Block level for Grievance Redressal. Verify Name, Date of Birth, Address, and Relationship Details against PoI, DoB, PoA, PoR, respectively.   Name PoI requires a document containing the resident’s name and photograph. Verify that supporting document has both. If any of the PoI document submitted does not contain the photograph of the resident, then it will not be accepted as a valid PoI. In order to be inclusive and free of harassment, documents with older photographs are acceptable. Confirm the name in the document by asking the resident his/her name. This is to ensure that the resident is providing own documents. The name of the person should be entered in full. It should not include salutations or titles like Mr., Miss, Mrs., Major, Retd., Dr. etc   It is very important to write the person’s name very carefully and correctly. For example, the respondent may tell that his name is V. Vijayan whereas his full name may be VenkatramanVijayan and similarly R. K. Srivastava’s full name may actually be Ramesh Kumar Srivastava. Similarly, a female enrollee may tell her name as K. S. K. Durga while her full name may be Kalluri Surya Kanaka Durga. Ascertain from her/him the expansion of her/his initials and check the same in the documentary evidence produced. In case of difference in the name declared and the one in document (PoI) is limited to spelling and/or sequence of first, middle and last name, the name as declared by the resident may be recorded . If two documentary proofs produced by the enrollee have variation in the same name (i.e., with initials and full name), the enrollee’s full name should be recorded. Sometimes the infants and children may not have been named yet. Try to ascertain the intended name for the child by explaining to the enrollee the importance of capturing the name of the individual for allotting UID. In case of non availability of supporting documents for PoI, the name should be recorded with the assistance of the Introducer     Date Of Birth (DOB):  Date of birth of Resident must indicate day, month and year in the relevant field. If the Resident provides documentary evidence of Date of Birth, then the Date of Birth is considered as “Verified”. When resident declares the DoB without any documentary evidence, then date of birth is considered as “Declared”. When the resident is unable to give exact date of birth and only age is mentioned by the resident or approximated by the verifier then only age is recorded. The software will automatically calculate year of birth in such case. The Verifier should check the entry in the Enrolment/Update Form and ensure that the resident has correctly indicated the date of birth as “verified”/”declared” or has filled his/her Age.  Residential Address:   Verify that the PoA contains the name and address. The Verifier should ensure that the name in the PoA document matches with the name in the PoI document. A difference in the name in PoI and PoA document is acceptable if the difference is only in spelling and/or sequence of first, middle and last name. The “care of” person’s name, if any, is usually captured for children and old age people living with parents and children, respectively. If not available, one can leave this Address line blank. Enhancement of address is allowed. The resident may be allowed to add minor fields such as House No., Lane No., Street Name, correcting typographic errors, minor changes/ corrections to pin code etc. to the address listed in the PoA as long as these additions/modifications do not alter the base address mentioned in the PoA document If the changes requested in Address Enhancement are substantial and change the base address that is listed in the PoA, the resident will be required to produce an alternate PoA or enrol through an Introducer.  Relationship Details:   In the case of children below 5 years, “Name” and “Aadhaar Number” of one of the parents or guardian is mandatory. Parent/Guardian must produce their Aadhaar letter when enrolling children (or they can be Enroled together). In the case of an adult, no verification will be done for the information on parent or spouse. They are recorded for internal purposes only.  Head of Family(HoF):   Verify that the PoR document establishes relation between the Head of Family and the family member. Only those family members can be Enroled based on the relationship document (PoR), whose names are recorded on relationship document. Head of Family must always accompany the family member when the family member is getting Enroled. The verifier must also check the HoF details in the Enrolment/ Update Form in case of HoF based verification. HoF’s Name and Aadhaar Number in form should be verified against the Aadhaar letter. Ensure that in case of HoF based enrolments, the relationship details mentioned in the form are of the HoF only.  Mobile Number, Email address: If the enrollee possesses and is willing to provide his/her Mobile Number and / or Email Address, these optional fields must be filled in. Verifier can inform the importance of these fields to the resident. UIDAI can get in touch with the resident using this information, if required, like in case of returned letters.   	episode_done:True
text:What are the responsibilities of a Verifier?	labels:For enrolment, Resident will bring his/her Original documents/ Attested Photocopies along with filled Aadhaar Enrolment/Update Form. Verifier must verify the information mentioned in the supporting documents with the information mentioned in the Aadhaar Enrolment/Update Form. Verifier also checks that the names of the documents captured in the enrolment form are correct and same as the original documents produced by the resident.  Verifier needs to be available in the enrolment centre throughout the operating hours of the centre. Registrars should ensure physical presence of verifiers during the enrolment. It is verifier’s responsibility to ensure that Enrolment/Update Form is filled completely and correctly as per UIDAI enrolment process. No mandatory field should be left blank and resident should be encouraged to fill optional fields like mobile number and email address. Verifier will sign and stamp the Enrolment/Update Form after verification. If stamp is not available, the verifier can sign and put his/her Name. The resident will then go to the Enrolment Agency Operator for getting Enroled. However, if the resident is Enroled and has come for Correction for a particular demographic field, the resident need not enter all details in the Form. The resident must provide his/her original Enrolment Number, Date and Time (together known as EID), his/her Name and the field which needs correction. Verifier will only verify if it is one of the fields requiring verification of documents. Verifier will use the same UIDAI verification guidelines as used during resident enrolment. Verifier’s signature/thumb print and stamp/Name is required except in case where copies attested / certified by a public notary / gazetted officer are being submitted. The Verifier must be physically present at the enrolment centre every day and, thus, can monitor the Enrolment Centre performance and provide immediate information to UIDAI and Registrar on process deviations and malpractices at the enrolment centre.  	episode_done:True
text:Who is a Verifier?	labels:When the resident comes to enrol for Aadhaar to an Enrolment Centre, demographic information will be entered from documents that the resident provides. The authentication of documents submitted by the resident is duly verified by the officials authorized to verify the documents. Such officials are termed as verifiers. The verifier present at the Enrolment Centre will verify the documents submitted by the resident against the enrolment form filled by the resident. The services of the retired government officials who are generally well acquainted with such verification procedures should be utilized by the Registrars in case they are unable to spare serving officials for document verification.  Any serving /retired official both from Government (including Armed forces and CPMFs) and PSUs including Banks not below the rank of Group ‘C’/ class III employees may be allowed to be deployed as Verifiers. In the areas, like big cities and Metros, where registrar is unable to avail the services of such Retired/Serving government officials, services of an outsourced vendor can be availed of to provide verifiers with the approval from UIDAI Regional Office. The verifiers in an enrolment centre cannot be from the same vendor, hired as enrolment agency. Registrar needs to ensure that verifiers are appropriately trained before being put in the field. The Registrar may appoint more than one Verifier in a centre, if and where required. The list of all Verifiers must be notified, by designation, by the Registrar before commencement of the enrolments and the list should be shared with the Regional office concerned.  	episode_done:True
text:What are the responsibilities of an EA’s Supervisor?	labels:At the Enrolment Centre, Supervisor’s role is to plan and deploy logistics and other requirements at the enrolment centre, setup the enrolment stations at the enrolment centre as per UIDAI guidelines as per Enrolment centre Setup checklist and supervise the operations at the centre. When performing his/her role as a Supervisor at an Aadhaar Enrolment Centre, the Supervisor ensures the following:   Site Readiness  UIDAI has provided Enrolment Centre Checklist to facilitate the Enrolment Agency in setting up enrolment stations and centres. Supervisor must use this list to ensure that all requirements are met for the centre that he/she is responsible for. He/she must fill and sign the checklist at the beginning of each enrolment centre and/or once every week (whichever is earlier). This checklist needs to be maintained for later review/audit at every enrolment centre by Registrar/UIDAI and their nominated performance monitors/agency. Supervisor is responsible for setting up of the laptop/desktop with Aadhaar client installed and tested, attached with all devices and printer cum scanners and ensure all equipment are in working condition to start Aadhaar Enrolments/Update. Ensure that the latest Aadhaar Enrolment client/Update software is installed. Ensure that the enrolment centre premises are neat and clean, hygienic, well maintained and safe from electric/fire hazards. Ensure that basic enrolment centre information as given below is displayed Mandatorily at each enrolment station(in local language and English):  Name of Registrar and Contact Number Name of Enrolment Agency & Contact Number Name, Code, and contact number of EA Supervisor at enrolment centres Escalation Matrix for Raising Complaint against the Supervisor Working hours and Holidays of the Enrolment Centre UIDAI Help Line Number: 1947 and email id: This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. document.getElementById('cloak889e8e1d427b40ef08d40cd81d45e646').innerHTML = ''; var prefix = '&#109;a' + 'i&#108;' + '&#116;o'; var path = 'hr' + 'ef' + '='; var addy889e8e1d427b40ef08d40cd81d45e646 = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;'; addy889e8e1d427b40ef08d40cd81d45e646 = addy889e8e1d427b40ef08d40cd81d45e646 + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n'; var addy_text889e8e1d427b40ef08d40cd81d45e646 = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;' + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n';document.getElementById('cloak889e8e1d427b40ef08d40cd81d45e646').innerHTML += '<a ' + path + '\'' + prefix + ':' + addy889e8e1d427b40ef08d40cd81d45e646 + '\'>'+addy_text889e8e1d427b40ef08d40cd81d45e646+'<\/a>'; List of Documents required for Aadhaar Enrolment/Update Rate List for all the Aadhaar related services   Supervisor will also make sure that the Aadhaar IEC material provided by the Registrar/UIDAI is properly displayed at the centre, as per UIDAI guidelines. Ensure that the behaviour of Operator and other staff at the enrolment centre is courteous towards the residents. Take charge where Operator is not able to handle dissatisfied resident to prevent unpleasant situations. Where uniforms are provided, make sure that staff wears uniform at enrolment centre so that if residents need help they can easily identify employees by their attire. Do not undertake enrolment operations at any locations without valid agreement with the Registrars.  On Boarding self and others   Supervisor must submit his/her “On boarding Form” along with the required documents to the Enrolment Agency which in turn submit the form to concerned “UIDAI Regional Offices” for verification. After verification Regional Offices will approve/reject the on boarding with the respective Enrolment Agency. Enrolment Agency will then add the Supervisor by taking his/her biometrics in the Aadhaar client software and provide a User Name & Password to operate the Enrolment Machine. Enroled User means user’s biometric details verification at UIDAI is successfully completed and stored in local database at the enrolment station. Supervisor must make sure that all the “Operators” are also on-boarded at the stations for local authentication.  Managing Centre Operations   Supervisor also acts as an Operator, when required, in exigencies. Supervisor must be aware of latest guidelines & policies as regard to Enrolments & updates being released from time to time by UIDAI Supervisor administers the enrolment process at his/her enrolment centre. He/she ensures adherence to the UIDAI enrolment processes and guidelines at the centre and good quality of data captured. Supervisor must ensure that the residents who have come for Fresh Enrolment have never Enroled for Aadhaar by using “Find Aadhaar Facility”. Supervisor must ensure that the resident is well informed that his/her biometric will only be used for Aadhaar Enrolment/Update. Supervisor must ensure that the resident has filled the prescribed form for Aadhaar Enrolment/Update correctly and has brought all the Original Supporting documents for scanning. Supervisor must ensure only the required items are checked in case of any update, not the complete information to avoid duplicity of data collected e.g. if Address has to be updated only the Address Check Box should be selected others. Supervisor is required to “Sign off” every enrolment on Aadhaar client, where resident has a “biometric exception”. Supervisor must ensure that every Operator is aware of and has a print copy of the critical points to be reviewed at the station during Resident’s review of enrolment data. Supervisor must ensure that the Operator diligently reviews the data captured with resident for every enrolment/update and making corrections when pointed out by the resident. Supervisor must ensure that the Operator provides his/her biometric confirmation after every Aadhaar enrolment/update. Supervisor must ensure that Acknowledgement is being printed after every enrolment and dully signed by the resident. Supervisor must ensure that the Original Documents used as Proof of Identity/Proof of Relationship/Proof of Address/Proof of Birth and Signed Acknowledgement Slip is scanned for every enrolment. Supervisor can hold End of Day meeting at the centre for sharing learning of the day and issues faced. Supervisor must take stock of the centre at the end of the day and make arrangements for replacement of faulty devices, hardware and other logistics for smooth enrolments the next day. Check devices periodically for scratches, out of focus images, only partial images getting captured. In case any such problem is noticed, it should be reported to the concerned Enrolment Agency Manager/HQ and a change of equipment should be requested. Ensure all devices and computers are shut down and power is off to avoid accidents. Ensure security arrangements for devices and other equipments. Specific End of Day Reports is available on the client, for selected time period, to facilitate EA Operations. Supervisor can make use of these reports in managing day to day operations at the centre. Supervisor must ensure that staff at the centre observes the highest standards of ethics during the execution of Aadhaar Enrolment/Update and do not ask for any additional money except for the prescribed fee. Supervisor is also responsible for maintaining the confidentiality and security of the data collected during Aadhaar enrolments.  Backup, Sync and Export   Supervisor ensures twice a day data backup of all enrolment data to external hard disk as per UIDAI guidelines. Record date and station number where backup done to ensure that all stations are backed up and none is missed. Supervisor also ensures that enrolment stations are synched at least once in every 10 days. Supervisor manages timely data export of enrolment data for uploading to UIDAI server. Supervisor can maintain a register for data exported. Record date, station number and packets exported at each station for reconciliation purpose.  End of Day Review / Correction  Supervisor must Review all enrolments of the day, End of Day (EoD), to ensure that data entered in the Aadhaar client is correct for each resident. Supervisor may also deploy a fellow operator on-boarded on the machine for end of day review. However, the operator who did the enrolment cannot review his/her own packets. In case any error/logical mismatch are found in the data entered, inform the resident to come to the enrolment centre within correction time frame. Supervisor must sign off by giving his/her fingerprint after End of Day Review. Once correction is done to the resident's data, the Supervisor will again manually Approve/ Reject the Resident's packet put on Hold earlier for correction, with appropriate reason if rejected.  Performance Monitoring   The Supervisor cooperates with the UIDAI/Registrar’s monitors in performing monitoring and audit functions at the enrolment centre and answers their questions to the best of his/her knowledge. Supervisor details are recorded during performance monitoring and Supervisor also signs on the performance monitoring sheet along with the monitor. Supervisor ensures audit feedback, if any, is incorporated in process for continuous improvement of enrolment operations and data quality     	episode_done:True
text:Who is a Supervisor and what are his/her qualifications?	labels:A Supervisor is employed by an Enrolment Agency to operate and manage enrolment centres. It is mandatory to have one Supervisor at each Enrolment Centre. To qualify for this role, the person should satisfy the following criteria: The person should be of age 18 years and above   The person shall be 10+2 pass and should preferably be a graduate The person should have been Enroled for Aadhaar and his/her Aadhaar number should have been generated. The person should have a good understanding and experience of using a computer The person should have obtained “Supervisor Certificate” from a Testing and Certification Agency appointed by UIDAI.   Before starting work as a Supervisor:   The person must be engaged and activated by any Enrolment Agency in accordance with UIDAI guidelines prior to commencing enrolments. The person should have undergone Training Session conducted by Regional Offices/Enrolment Agency on Aadhaar Enrolment/Update Processes and various equipment and devices used during Aadhaar enrolment. The person should have read the complete Training Material on Aadhaar Enrolment/Update available on UIDAI website before giving the certification exam. The person should be comfortable with local language keyboard and transliteration   	episode_done:True
text: How does the Operator perform Correction in Resident’s Data?	labels:  For correction in any of the above data of a resident, the Operator may use Correction menu on Enrolment Client (one time). Resident data can be corrected within 96 hours of the resident’s enrolment and in the presence of the resident. The following requests for changes are included in the scope of the Correction Process:  All demographic fields i.e., Name, Address, Gender, Date of Birth / Age* Relationship to resident Mobile Email Address Relationship Details(Relation type, Name and Aadhaar Number) Introducer Name and Aadhaar Number   If originally the resident was Enroled as a child below 5 years of age, it is invalid to correct the resident age to above 5 years because biometric data was not captured during enrolment. The previous Enrolment ID of the resident needs to be entered for correction of resident’s old data. Check resident’s acknowledgement letter for taking Enrolment number, date and time of enrolment for correction. PoI, PoA and Parent/Guardian’s acknowledgement letter will also be required at the time of correction process depending on the type of correction. A change in Name would require either a verified Enrolment Form and PoI document or an Introducer’s Name and UID. A change in Address would require either a verified Enrolment Form and PoA document or an Introducer’s Name and Aadhaar Number. A change in verified DoB would require a verified Enrolment Form and DoB certificate. If the correction is in data for a child below 5 years of age, then parent details of relationship type, relative name and Aadhaar Number of parent/guardian is also mandatory. Only the fields that need a correction are entered in the Correction menu of the software. Fields that are good in original enrolment are not to be retyped during Correction. The correction in data will be reviewed with the resident and any one of the biometrics of the resident (provided in drop down menu on client) will also be taken to confirm that the resident is OK with corrections. In case the resident is child below 5 years, the biometric of the parent/guardian whose details are entered in the relationship fields, will be taken. The Operator will sign off the enrolment and Supervisor, Introducer sign off will be required in biometric exceptions and Introducer based verification respectively. An acknowledgement of correction will be printed at the end of correction process along with the Resident’s photo. The acknowledgement of correction will be signed by Operator and handed over to Resident. The consent will be signed by the resident and filed by the Operator along with the other documents of the resident.  	episode_done:True
text:What are the Document Scanning Guidelines of UIDAI?	labels:The Operator will scan Originals of each of the documents below depending on the type of enrolment:   Enrolment Form – For each Enrolment PoI, PoA – For document based enrolments DoB document – For Verified Date of Birth PoR – For Head of Family Based Enrolments Acknowledgement cum Consent – For each Enrolment after Operator and Resident’s signature     In instances where Original documents are not available, copies attested / certified by a public notary / gazetted officer will be accepted. The documents are scanned in a sequence and all document scans are standard size (A4). Make sure that the desired portions (the data entered during Aadhaar enrolment) of the document are visible clearly in the scan and the document pages do not overlap. Each scanned page must be legible and without any marks due to dust and scratches. Remove the previous scan and re- scan a document where required. Once all document pages are scanned, the Operator can see and check the total no. of pages scanned and confirm that all pages are scanned. Return all the original documents and Enrolment Form to the resident. Also handover the acknowledgement cum Consent to the Resident.  	episode_done:True
text:What Does the Operator do after Capturing Demographic and Biometric Data of the Resident?	labels:  The Operator will then authenticate himself/ herself to sign-off the data captured for the resident. Do not allow anyone else to sign for an enrolment that you have done. Do not sign for enrolments done by others. Operator will get the Supervisor to Sign Off in case enrolee has biometric exceptions In case the verification type is selected as Introducer/HOF, get the Introducer/HOF to sign off on the review screen. If the Introducer is not physically present at the time of enrolment select the check box "Attach later" so that the enrolment can be verified by the Introducer at the End of the Day. Operator can select the language in which the legal/declaration text on print receipt shall be printed on consent. Operator must ask the resident his/her preferred language in which the receipt must be printed. On selection of any of the declaration language option, the print receipt will be printed in the selected language i.e. English or any local language set on the configuration screen. Take Resident’s signature on consent and file the same along with resident’s other documents. The Resident’s consents are important as they are resident’s approval/disapproval, to the UIDAI. Sign and Provide Acknowledgement to resident. The acknowledgement is a written confirmation of the resident getting Enroled. It is important for the resident as it carries the enrolment number, date and time that the resident will need to quote when interacting with UIDAI and its Contact centre (1947) for information on his/her Aadhaar status. The enrolment number, date and time are also required if any correction in the resident’s data is required to be done using Correction process. Thus the operator must make sure that the acknowledgement and consent printed is clear and legible. While handing over the acknowledgement to the Resident, the Operator must inform below to the resident.   The Enrolment Number printed on acknowledgement is not the Aadhaar number and that the Resident’s Aadhaar number will be communicated through a letter subsequently. This message is also printed in acknowledgement. The resident must preserve his/her and the children’s Enrolment Acknowledgement Slip for future reference. In case of introducer based enrolment, the introducer will have to properly sign off within the specified period and Resident’s Aadhaar is subject to endorsement by a valid Introducer. There is a 96 hour period during which the resident’s data correction, so in case of any mistake they should avail this facility. To know the Aadhaar Generation Status they can call the Call Centre or log on to e-Aadhaar portal/Aadhaar Portal/website. Aadhaar number will be delivered by the local post office/or other designated agency in the address provided at the time of enrolment.    	episode_done:True
text: How does the Operator Review Data with the Resident?	labels:The Operator must show the data entered to the resident on a monitor facing the resident and if required, read out the content to the enrollee, to ensure that all details captured are correct. During Review of the enrolment data with resident, Operator must read out critical fields to the resident before the Operator Finishes the Enrolment.  The Operator must reconfirm the following fields:  Spellings of Resident’s Name Correct Gender Correct Age/Date of Birth Address – Pin Code; Building; Village/ Town /City; District; State Relationship Details – Parent/Spouse/Guardian ; Relative Name Accuracy and Clarity of Photograph of the resident Mobile Number & Email ID   In case of any errors, Operator must correct recorded data and review again with the resident. If no corrections are required, resident will approve the data.  	episode_done:True
text:What are the UIDAI Guidelines for Biometric Data Capture?	labels:Biometric Data Capture Guidelines:   Check resident’s eyes and fingers for fitness (missing/amputated). If the resident has any deformities due to which it is not possible to take fingerprints/iris, these also have to be captured as a biometric exception. Check and indicate Biometric Exceptions in the software, only where applicable. Do not mark biometric exceptions where biometrics can be captured. It will be treated as ‘fraud’ and invite strictest penalty. In case of Biometric exception, always take the Exception photograph of the resident showing resident’s face and both hands, irrespective of the type of exception. The enrolee may not be in a position to keep herself / himself in correct posture for reaching biometric instruments or for photograph due to old age or sickness. In such cases the operator should arrange to take the biometric data by moving the equipment close to the enrolee. If the finger/iris of the resident has a temporary damage and it is not possible to capture the biometric, the Operator will record it in exceptions. The resident should later get his/her biometric updated. Capture Biometrics - Facial Image, IRIS and Fingerprints for all the residents above 5 years in age. In case of any children who are below 5 years in age, only Facial Image and any one parent’s Biometric Confirmation is captured.   Guidelines for Facial Image Capture   Enrolee Position: For capturing facial image, it is advisable for the operator to adjust the camera instead of the Enrolee to position herself/himself at the right distance or in the right posture. Frontal pose needs to be captured i.e. no head rotation or tilt. The resident should be instructed to be seated properly with their back upright and their face towards the camera. Focus: The capture device should use auto focus and auto-capture functions. The output image should not suffer from motion blur, over or under exposure, unnatural colored lighting, and distortion. Expression: Expression strongly affects the performance of automatic face recognition and also affects accurate visual inspection by humans. It is strongly recommended that the face should be captured with neutral (non-smiling) expression, teeth closed, and both eyes open and looking into the camera. Illumination: Poor illumination has a high impact on the performance of face recognition. Proper and equally distributed lighting mechanism should be used such that there are no shadows over the face, no shadows in eye sockets, and no hot spots. No light exactly above the enrolee should be used since it can cause shadows. Light should be diffused and placed in front of the enrolee so that there are no shadows under the eye. Eye Glasses: If the person normally wears glasses, it is recommended that the photograph be taken with glasses. However, the glasses should be clear and transparent. Dark glasses /tinted glasses should be taken off before taking the photograph. Accessories: Use of accessories that cover any region of the face is not permitted. For example, women in purdah would have to reveal the full face before the photograph is taken. Similarly women in Ghoonghat would have to clearly reveal the full face before the photograph can be captured. The head may remain covered but the full face contour should be visible. Further, accessories like turban/head gear are also allowed as religious/ traditional practices. However, accessories like eye patches are allowed due to medical reasons. This would also mean an exception needs to be recorded for Iris, because only one Iris can be captured. Operators need to be trained to obtain the best possible face images that satisfy requirements. Even if the quality flag is green but the Operator is able to judge that a better picture can be taken, then same should be attempted. However, it should be borne in mind that recapture should not become harassment for the resident. For children, it is acceptable that the child sits on parent’s laps, but it needs to be ensured that parent’s face is not captured along with child’s face. The background may get rejected due to non white screen in case of children but two faces should not get captured in one picture. Actionable feedback needs to be checked for captures that fail. Some of the actionable feedbacks in software are:   No face Found Enrolee too far Enrolee too close (eye distance in input image is greater than one third of image width) Pose (Look Straight) Insufficient lighting Very low face confidence (faceless, object not identified as human face) Non-uniform lighting (of face in output image) Incorrect background (in output image) Insufficient lighting (bad gray values in face area of output image)    If any biometric exceptions have been specified on the demographic screen, these should be captured as photographs on the Photograph screen. Only facial image is captured for children below 5 years. Iris and fingerprint screens will not get activated for children below 5 years    Guidelines for Capturing Fingerprints   The images of all the ten fingers are to be captured. The fingerprints must be captured in the sequence of slaps of four fingers of left hand, right hand followed by the two thumbs. The fingers have to be positioned correctly on the platen to enable capture. There should be no direct light shining on the platen. Use the Indicators on fingerprint devices for positioning of fingers. The fingers should be placed in right direction on the device. Please consult the manufacturer manual incase of any doubt or else consult the supervisor. Use a lint free cloth periodically to clean the platen of the finger print device for good finger print capture Check devices periodically for scratches, out of focus images, only partial images getting captured. In case any such problem is noticed, then report to your Supervisor/HQ and request for change of equipment. Fingerprints cut off, wet/smudged fingerprint; very light prints due to insufficient pressure will result in poor quality. The resident’s hands should be clean (no mud, oil etc.). Ask resident to wash hands with water and soap, if necessary. The fingers should not be excessively dry or wet. Moisten with a wet cloth or dry finger with a dry cloth The Enrollee should be requested to place all four fingers of the left hand/right hand/two thumbs to platen of the fingerprint scanner for the four-finger capture to ensure good contact and maximize the area of the captured fingerprints. Ensure that the fingers are placed flat and till the top joint of the finger is placed well on the scanner. The top of the fingers should be within the platen area and not outside the defined area. If automatic capture does not happen, the operator should force the capture when force capture tab is enabled in the enrolment software. The operator should check the actionable feedback when capture fails. Some actionable feedbacks provided by software are:  Number of fingers present does not match with expected number of fingers Finger not positioned correctly Too much Pressure (duty cycle) Too little pressure Central region missing Excessive moisture (wetness) Excessive dryness   The operator should visually check the image for quality and for typical problems. In case there are problems go back to steps above to retry the capture. When image quality is pass or if maximum number of captures are exhausted, move on to the next step Fingerprints are best captured in standing position In case of additional fingers, ignore the additional finger and capture the main five fingers. Make sure your own fingerprints do not get mixed with the resident’s fingerprints. Operators can carefully put small pressure on the resident’s fingers to capture the fingerprints but always make sure not to mix your own fingerprints.   Guidelines for Capturing Iris   The operator and not the Enrollee will handle the capture device, generally. Children can be told that it is like taking photos/pictures so that they are not apprehensive. The Enrollee will be required to sit in a fixed position, like taking a portrait photograph. The software is able to measure the iris image quality. An initial image quality assessment would be done to provide feedback to the operator during the capture process. The software alerts the operator with actionable feedbacks, if the captured iris image is of insufficient quality. Some actionable feedbacks provided by software are:  Occlusion(significant part of iris is not visible) Iris not in focus Gaze incorrect(resident looking away) Pupil dilation   The iris capture process is sensitive to ambient light. No direct or artificial light should directly reflect off Enrolee’s eyes. The device should be held steady. In case device requires to be held by resident, the enrolment operator/supervisor may help the resident to hold the device steady. Table light used for facial image capture should be switched off during iris capture. Direct sunlight or any other bright light shining on resident’s eye will create reflections and result in poor quality image. Operator must instruct the resident to look straight into the camera, open eyes wide open (one easy way to do this is to ask the resident look angry or stare) and do not blink during iris capture. Resident has to be stationary. If resident is experiencing difficulty during Iris scan and recapture is required, then the operator may navigate to next screen to capture other details and then return to Iris capture. This will relax the resident from constant pressure to keep eyes wide open during iris capture. The Operator needs to be patient during capture and wait for the device response instead of scrolling, navigating back and forth on screen.  	episode_done:True
text:What are the UIDAI Guidelines for Demographic Data Capture?	labels:Demographic Data Capture Guidelines:   Enter the Demographic details of the resident from the verified Enrolment/Update Form. In case of Aadhaar Update, only the fields which need to be updated should be marked and filled. Encourage the resident to add mobile number and email ID in the form, for UIDAI to get in touch with the resident using these details. Pay attention to Data Aesthetics during demographic data capture. Avoid improper use of spaces, punctuation marks, capital & small letters during data capture. Avoid use of un-parliamentary language & transliteration error. Leave those non-mandatory fields blank where no data is provided by resident. Do not enter N/A, NA etc. in fields where Resident has not provided any data. Filling Father / Mother / Husband / Wife / Guardian field is not mandatory for residents above the age of 5 years in case the adult is not in a position or does not want to disclose. Then select checkbox “Not Given” in “Relationship to Resident”. In case of children below the age of 5 years one of the parents’ or guardian’s name and Aadhaar Number shall be mandatorily recorded. It is not compulsory for only father’s name to be recorded against the ‘parent’s name.’ Mother’s name can alone be recorded for the ‘parent’s guardian’s’ name if so desired by the parent. Enrolment of the parent is mandatory prior to the child. If the child’s father /mother / guardian has not Enroled or does not possess Aadhaar Number at the time of enrolment, the enrolment of that child cannot be done. For Head of Family (HoF) based verification Name, Aadhaar Number of HoF and Relationship Details of the family member to HoF are mandatory details to be entered.  	episode_done:True
text:What are the Fifteen Commandments that an Operator must remember during Resident Enrolment?	labels:  At the Enrolment Centre, Operator’s role is to capture Demographic and Biometric data of the resident getting Enroled as per the guidelines of UIDAI. When performing his/her role as an Operator at an Aadhaar Enrolment Centre ensure the following “Fifteen Commandments”: Make sure to Login with your own Operator ID in Aadhaar client, for undertaking enrolments, and log off the application when going away from the seat so that no one else can use your login window for enrolments. Capturing GPS coordinates at start of enrolments everyday. Make sure that on each login, the date and time setting on the computer is current. Make sure that the station layout is as per UIDAI guidelines. Brief the enrolment/update process to resident before and during the process to put the resident at ease and facilitate data capture. Make sure that the resident has never Enroled for Aadhaar before doing a fresh enrolment using the “Find Aadhaar Facility” provided. Make sure all the Original Documents are available which are required for type of Enrolment/Update requested by the resident and belongs to the same resident whose enrolment/update is to be done. Encourage the resident to enter their Mobile Number and email id for future communication with the resident and other uses like OTP based Authentication and online Aadhaar Update facility. Check that the resident’s Aadhaar Enrolment/Update form is verified and carries Verifier’s signature/thumb print and stamp/initials. The form must also carry Resident’s (Applicant’s) signature/thumbprint. Make sure that the resident is well informed that his/her biometric will only be used for Aadhaar Enrolment/Update and no other purpose. In case of Introducer/HoF based enrolment, the Introducer/HoF’s signature/thumbprint should be available in the form along with their details filled in the fields provided for Introducer and HoF, respectively. Capture demographic and biometric data of the resident in the Aadhaar client software (ECMP/UCL) in the sequence of data capture as per the screens provided on the software client. Make sure that the resident’s screen is on all the time during the enrolment/update and ask the resident to cross check the data being entered and review demographic data with resident before signing off. Print, sign and provide acknowledgement to the resident and take resident’s signature on consent at the end of enrolment. Make sure the Enrolment/Update Form, Original Supporting Documents & Signed Consent slip is uploaded in the Enrolment/Update Client and all documents are returned to the resident.  	episode_done:True
text:Who is an Operator and what are his/her qualifications?	labels:An Operator is employed by an Enrolment Agency to execute enrolment at the enrolment stations. To qualify for this role, person should satisfy the following criteria:   The person should be of age 18 years and above. The person shall be 10+2 pass and should preferably be a graduate. The person should have been Enroled for Aadhaar and his/her Aadhaar number should have been generated. The person should have a basic understanding of operating a computer and should be comfortable with local language keyboard and transliteration. The person should have obtained “Operator Certificate” from a Testing and Certification Agency appointed by UIDAI.   Before starting work as an Operator:   The person must be engaged and activated by any Enrolment Agency in accordance with UIDAI guidelines prior to commencing enrolments. The person should have undergone Training Session conducted by Regional Offices/Enrolment Agency on Aadhaar Enrolment/Update Processes and various equipment and devices used during Aadhaar enrolment. The person should have read the complete Training Material on Aadhaar Enrolment/Update available on UIDAI website before giving the certification exam. The person should be comfortable with local language keyboard and transliteration Operator must submit his/her “On boarding Form” along with the required documents to the Enrolment Agency which in turn submit the form to concerned “UIDAI Regional Offices” for verification. After verification Regional Offices will approve/reject the on boarding with the respective Enrolment Agency. Enrolment Agency will then add the Operator by taking his/her biometrics in the Aadhaar client software and provide a User Name & Password to operate the Enrolment Machine. Enroled User means that the user’s biometric details verification at UIDAI is successfully completed and stored in local database at the enrolment station.  	episode_done:True
text:What are the Preparatory Activities that an EA must do prior to starting enrolments?	labels:Preparatory Stage Activities of an EAEA must identify their Project & Technology managers who will be part of the Joint Working Group headed by the Head of the Nodal/Registrar Department. Initiation and On-boarding Workshop for EA must organised by Registrar and UIDAI will provide detailed enrolment process & implementation overview. EA must familiarize themselves with Enrolment process and policies including periodic amendments/updates. The scope of work of the Enrolling Agency (EA) includes the following activities:1. Procure enrolment hardware, software including Biometric Devices as per UIDAI Specifications The enrolling agency should procure enrolment hardware, software including certified biometric devices (for fingerprint and iris capture), used for capture of biometric data at the enrolling station, which conform to UIDAI specifications. EA must procure only those Biometric Devices that are certified by UIDAI or its duly authorized agency. The EAs must also ensure continued technical support by the suppliers for the hardware. 2. Hire & Train Manpower for Enrolment The Enrolling Agency shall hire manpower, Operators and Supervisors, to operate the enrolment station/centre as per the guidelines prescribed by UIDAI. The enrolling agency must have Technical personnel to provide technical support during enrolment at the enrolment centres. Technical personnel for attending power /system / biometric instrument related maintenance problems should be available on call in a centrally located place covering about six enrolment centres so that the downtime can be minimized. EA must make sure that the Operators and Supervisors are of age 18 years and above. The Operator should be minimum 10+2 pass and should be comfortable using computer. The Supervisor should be minimum 10+2 pass and preferably a Graduate and should have a good understanding and experience in using a computer.EA must ensure compliance to Labour laws and all statutory provisions in various Labour regulations that is PF, ESI, Industrial Disputes Act, Contract Labour Act and Minimum Wages Act etc.The personnel should be given mandatory induction training on the various activities and equipment and gadgets involved/used in the enrolment process and resident enrolment, transliteration skills in local language, to enable them to understand and adjust to the local situation. The mandatory induction training shall be compulsory before deployment of the personnel. The EA will inform concerned RO Regional Offices of UIDAI prior to training schedule and will also give a follow-up report.The enrolment agency shall ensure the availability of the requisite infrastructure for imparting training as per UIDAI guidelines The Operators and Supervisors should have obtained certificate from a testing and certifying agency authorized by UIDAI. Ensure correct certification as per specific roles. A certified Operator cannot work as a Supervisor.Payments to operators and supervisors should be made preferably to their bank accounts. 3. Enrol Operator/Supervisors and Register and Activate them at UIDAI Operator /Supervisors must have their Aadhaar numbers generated and certification test passed for getting activated in accordance with UIDAI guidelines prior to commencing enrolments. Do not deploy them for enrolment without the fulfilment of these mandatory requirements.EA admin user must use unique user IDs for activating their Operator/ Supervisors. Do not use one password for multiple set of Operator IDs. Ensure all details entered are correct on UIDAI technology portal and certification agency’s portal and there is no mismatch.EA must ensure availability of manpower activated in accordance with Aadhaar guidelines prior to commencing enrolments.EAs will have to demonstrate that they have certified the active operators, requisite machines and hardware available to be deployed. EAs will have to declare enrolment station deployment plans i.e. when and where the centers will be established. EAs will also demonstrate that they have the requisite supervision infrastructure available. Based on this information, ROs will assess the preparedness of the Registrars and EAs and may then allow the on-boarding of stations.4. Get established as an Enrolment Agency at UIDAIThe EA must receive their EA code from UIDAIThe EA must ask the Registrar to establish the link between them (Attach EA) at UIDAIReceive admin password for portal and auth code for client registration from UIDAIObtain SFTP account setup and password5. Ensure that Pin code data for planned enrolment locations is checked in Pin Master of Aadhaar software, and is correct and complete. Review and Report missing/incorrect Pin codes and use Pin code correction process for getting the Pin Numbers corrected. 6. Software Installation, Configuration and RegistrationThe latest version of Aadhaar Enrolment software client needs to be installed, configured and registered with CIDR. The Enrolment Agency needs Auth User and Auth Code from UIDAI technology team to register its clients.The person performing the system configuration is typically a representative of the Registrar. Normally the Registrar may ask the EA to perform the installation and configuration. In such a case, the configuration and registration may be done in presence of Registrar’s representatives.Load and test Pre-enrolment data on enrolment centre laptops / desktops and ensure it is accessible / searchable.All latest Master Data such as Pin code, Operator credentials, list of documents etc. should be loaded on clientThorough testing of Aadhaar client working in integration with pre-enrolment data and KYR+ applications, along with local language support, pin code and master data availabilityEnsure all Registered stations are active at UIDAIEnsure Operator/Supervisor/Introducer (OSI) are on boarded on the enrolment stations 7. EA must ensure with Registrar that Aadhaar and KYR+ Enrolment Forms are printed, ready for distribution/distributed to residents. If enrolment forms are distributed and filled in advance, it will help speed up enrolment at the Centre. The enrolment forms can be used as a tool for crowd management by controlled distribution. The print and paper quality of forms should be ensured as the forms will be stored as per Document Management System. 8. Setting up of Enrolment Centre(EC) and Enrolment Stations (ES) EA will assist Registrar in developing enrolment schedules. EA will work with the Registrar in identification of suitable enrolment centres at scheduled locations. Once EC are identified, EA must ensure readiness of the EC as per the latest Enrolment Centre Setup Checklist (Annexure 1). The Enrolment Centre Setup Checklist by UIDAI enlists the various requirements at Enrolment Centre and Station level and is to facilitate the EA in planning. Ensure adequate stationary like paper for printing and other logistics are available at centreEnsure adequate power and other backup arrangement at enrolment centreDeploy Hardware, Software for Enrolment. Working of all equipment and application at every station must be tested.EA must not undertake enrolment operations at locations without valid agreement with the Registrars.The Enrolment Agencies also need to fill the Enrolment Centre details at UIDAI portal.EA must adhere to Safety Procedures, Rules, Regulations, & Restrictions and shall comply with the provisions of all laws including safety and labour laws, rules, regulations and notifications issued there under from time to time. EA shall take all measures necessary or proper to protect the personnel and facilities and shall observe all reasonable safety rules and instructions.9. Contact Centre information filledEA must fill the forms with information required by UIDAI Contact Centre and submit. This information pertains to EA contacts at EC, Enrolment Centre address and working hours etc.10. Help Create AwarenessEnrolment Agency needs to work with the Registrar in communication and generating resident awareness at grass root level. Prior to the commencement of the Enrolment operations the Enrolment Agency shall work closely with the local governing bodies, key introducers in publicizing the Aadhaar, its importance and schedule for Aadhaar registration in that location. EA must prominently display important information relating to consent and operator responsibilities inside the enrolment centres. The role of the enrolment agency should be limited to publicising the content provided by the UIDAI/ Registrars. The EA should not add to / modify /delete the content provided by Registrar/ UIDAI.	episode_done:True
text:Are EAs allowed to sub-contract Enrolment Work?	labels:Sub-Contracting of Enrolment Work is not allowed for private/ commercial Organizations/PSUs /Govt. Companies /Autonomous bodies. However, field level manpower such as enrolment operators and supervisors can be hired through third parties. EAs must provide details of the companies from which they are going to hire this manpower. However, Government Organizations may choose to franchise enrolment work to CSCs/ Local Government bodies.	episode_done:True
text:Who is an Enrolment Agency (EA)?	labels:Enrolment Agencies are entities hired by the Registrars for undertaking demographic and biometric data collection for UID enrolment. Enrolment Agencies must ensure continued empanelment by UIDAI in order to be engaged by Registrars. If non-empanelled agencies are engaged by Registrars, they are also subject to the same terms and conditions as the empanelled agencies.	episode_done:True
text:What are the Responsibilities of the Registrar under the Aadhaar Project?	labels:A high level summary of various roles and responsibilities of Registrar are:. 1. Enrolment PlanningAs a part of the Enrolment Planning workshop, the Registrar is advised to finalize the targeted enrolment nos., locations to be covered and timelines for the same. This data can in turn be used to plan the no. of Enrolment Stations needed, locations for the same, devices needed, operators to be staffed etc.Registrars will also decide enrolment approach (phased, sweep etc). It is strongly recommended that the Registrar enrol all residents of the locality and not limit it to their beneficiaries/ customers. ‘Sweeping’ all residents will give Registrars the benefits of economies of scale and optimizing on the cost of enrolment per resident.Finalize plan to include marginalized/vulnerable communities & areas for CSO involvement. Special enrolment drives should be initiated by registrars in consultation with ROs for the underprivileged, various vulnerable groups and disabled persons.Identify area of interest for Aadhaar-enabled applications. Identify govt remittances which can be routed through Aadhaar-enabled Bank accounts. Registrars should link their UID enrolment activities to their core programs and citizen centric service delivery.Registrar will work with the UIDAI to identify Banks to partner with for Financial Inclusion solution. Define processes as required to implement the Financial Inclusion solution.At times, Registrar’s may have to hold special camps or call residents for re-enrolment like in case where EA machines get stolen or where Resident data packets are irrecoverable due to process/technology failure. Registrar must keep the EA apprised that such situations may arise and they have to be prepared for re-enrolment of residents in such cases.Registrar must keep the local authorities, Introducers, Verifiers and other stakeholders informed of enrolment schedule In order to start enrolments, the Registrar has to complete the following activities, many of which can run in parallel and would have commenced post the Project Initiation Workshop:2. Enrolment Agency Selection and On-boardingIdentify Enrolment Agencies (EA)1. Registrars may engage Enrolment Agencies for the purpose of enrolling resident into Aadhaar. Registrars will share the details of hired Enrolment Agencies with UIDAI.2. Registrars are advised to engage only Empanelled Enrolment Agencies. If non-empanelled agencies are engaged, they must be subject to the same terms and conditions as the empanelled agencies.3. New contracts should include a clause of continued empanelment mandatory for continuation of work. Model RFP/Q templates and the list of empanelled agencies have been published on UIDAI website.4. No Sub Contracting – Subcontracting has serious impacts on the quality and security of data. Agreement with enrolment agencies should have conditions to discourage sub-contracting. However field level manpower such as enrolment operators and supervisors can be hired through third parties. EAs should be asked to provide details of the companies from which they are going to hire this manpower.Onboard EA - EA Project & Technology managers need to be identified and added in JWG. Initiation Workshop for EA needs to be held by Registrar and UIDAI to provide detailed enrolment process & implementation overview.Identify Enrolment Agency related requirements of EA training, device/resource capacity planning.Procure infrastructure and equipment including certified biometric devices as per standards defined by the UIDAI, through the designated enrolment agencies.It is recommended that the Registrar must insist on Enrolment agencies using only trained operators/supervisors. All Enrolment Operators need to be tested and certified; keeping in mind the significant impact they have in collecting good quality and accurate data from residents. 3. Enrolment Centre and StationsEnrolment Centers and their Location1. Registrar will identify and co-ordinate for suitable locations where Enrolment Centers may be setup keeping in mind law and order, terrain, local weather conditions, security, power availability, approach/access to the area and lighting. Refer Resident Enrolment Process document for Centre selection guidelines.2. Non-state registrars should work in coordination with ROs and state nodal departments. NSRs should also have enrolment centres only in and around their premises to ensure close supervision. Bank NSRs can also be allowed to enrol through special camps provided that they have cleared these enrolment plans with the State UIDIC &/or the State Nodal officer.3. Registrars should plan for setting up permanent enrolment centres. Registrars need to maintain at least a skeletal enrolment network in their respective locations, after the ‘enrolment sweeps’ are completed to facilitate on-going enrolments and updation.Decide Number of Stations for Each Centre1. The number of stations can be decided based on the target number of days for completion of enrolment in the particular area or the district and the expected number of enrolees in the area. Model RFP published on UIDAI website provides an excel sheet for facilitating calculation of number of stations.2. Tables, lighting, backdrops, height of table, chairs, positioning of resident and operator, and issue of direct sunlight for photo capture, all these need to be considered for enrolment station setup.3. Ensure Setup & registration of enrolment stations as Active production machines with UIDAI. The enrolment agencies may be asked to submit their machine deployment plans and their preparedness as per a prescribed checklist. ROs will assess the preparedness of the Registrars and EAs and may then allow the on-boarding of stations.4. Registrar must Review the Enrolment Centre Setup checklist with Enrolment Agency and verify if all required activities are completed. 4. Define KYR+ fields The AADHAAR Enrolment Client application captures the KYR (Know Your Resident) data. The registrars may require capturing some other registrar specific fields related to residents called as KYR+ data. For example, in case of PDS data, information such as APL (Above poverty line), BPL (Below poverty line), Family Details, etc. may be collected as part of KYR+ data. If any KYR+ fields are to be collected, define those fields and initiate technology integration with respect to data capture API and logistics. However, experience suggests that the number of fields proposed to be captured at the enrolment station must be kept at minimum as residents cannot be expected to bring multiple documents at the time of enrolment. 5. Pre-Enrolment Data Registrar may want to complete the demographic data capture and verification ahead of the biometric capture. This step is called pre-enrolment. In case where Registrar has a good database, Registrars can share this with Enrolment Agencies to pre-populate the AADHAAR Enrolment Client. This data would reduce the effort and time of the enrolment operators during data capture process at the enrolment centres during resident’s presence. The details of the database need to be discussed and sent to UIDAI in advance in prescribed format and aligned to UIDAI requirements. However, pre-enrolling residents is not mandatory. 6. Check Pin Code MasterRegistrar must Review and get Pin code master data corrected and completed prior to start of enrolments in the region. Registrar should provide list of PIN codes to be corrected in PIN codes master to UIDAI using existing Pin Code correction process. 7. Review list of Approved documentsUIDAI has defined a list of valid documents to be used during Aadhaar enrolment process as Proof of Identity (PoI), Proof of Address (PoA), Proof of Relationship (PoR) and Date of Birth (DoB). However, UIDAI and Registrars have the authority to amend and enlarge the list of PoI and PoA documents in some exceptional circumstances. Registrars may add any other required document not in the list, in consultation with UIDAI Regional Office. The Enrolment Agencies will then download the master for documents in the client stations, pertaining to the Registrar, for use during enrolment. 8. Send local language requirementsSend local language requirements for contact centre, enrolment client (label/text, transliteration). Complete local language translation for labels, print receipts/letter in coordination UIDAI. 9. Biometric data need of registrar identifiedRegistrars may analyse their requirement for resident data and capability to securely manage and store data. It is not necessary for Registrar to store resident’s biometric data. Registrars are, instead, encouraged to adopt online authentication offered by UIDAI – this will require no local/offline storage of biometric data in registrar applications. However, if the Registrar decides to store the biometric data, then Registrar will have to share a plan to retrieve, manage and store data with UIDAI, for UIDAI to start creating Registrar data packets. 10. Provide registrar public key for data encryptionRegistrars must provide their public key to the UIDAI for the purpose of encrypting the EID-UID mapping file that UIDAI will share with Registrars after Aadhaar generation. Encrypting using Registrar’s public key provides a layer of security and is prescribed by UIDAI for data transfer. Registrar must contact UIDAI for details on public/ private key requirements. 11. Decryption UtilityRegistrars must develop their own decryption utility for decrypting the EID-UID mapping file. Registrar should also successfully test file decryption. 12. Develop Registrar Technical requirements Registrar will require technical personnel/system integrators for developing their technical requirements forPre-enrolment data captureKYR+ applicationDocument storageRegistrar packet transfer/ management & usageDecryption utilityFirst mile i.e. data transfer from Enrolment Centres to UIDAI and RegistrarKYR+ data transfer, automating EID-UID mapping in KYR+ databaseReceiving EID-UID mapping file from CIDR. Registrar must be ready to receive and update Registrar DBs with EID-UID mappingOther activation and portal workflow related requirements13. Other Technology side RequirementsThere are some requirements that the Registrar will need to do for integration with UIDAI database:Get set up as a Registrar in UIDAI database. Send requisite details in prescribed format to UIDAI.Receive Registrar code, login and password for technology portal and SFTP applicationThen Attach EAs on technology portal to establish Registrar – EA linkage.Update and activate Introducers list on technology portalReceive and download SFTP applicationDefine Location Codes – Registrar can assign location codes to each of its schedule and this code can be used by Enrolment Agency in client machines when conducting enrolments in the particular region. The assignment of location codes will help in generating enrolment reports by location code which can be helpful for payment purposes. Registrar’s supervisors at Enrolment Centres will have to monitor the use of correct location codes by Enrolment Agency.A representative of the registrar performs the system configuration and registration once the software is installed. Normally the Registrar may ask the EA to perform the installation and configuration. In such a case, the configuration and Registration may be done in presence of Registrar’s representatives and/or Registrar must regularly check the registration details on the client like location code, Registrar and EA name etc. Work flow related requirements – At times Registrar may be asked to intervene and given a role in a process workflow for example in cases where resident data packets are on hold due to specific reasons. Registrar will have to complete the given responsibility in a defined time period in such cases.14. Registrar software readiness and their integration to Aadhaar softwareRegistrar must check Aadhaar Application Software is ready for deployment with pincode data corrected, registrar public key and local language support included. Test Registrar’s own software and their integration with Aadhaar software.15. Information, Education & CommunicationRegistrar will define an integrated IEC Plan & Material leveraging the content developed by the UIDAI. The UIDAI’s IEC guidelines list in detail the different kinds of stakeholders to engage (PRI members, introducers, CSOs, etc.) and the recommended messages and media to use for each of them. The IEC plan lists the activities to be triggered 45/30/15/ 7 days before commencing enrolments.Registrars must coordinate with UIDAI IEC team for details on their IEC responsibilities.16. Identify and Deploy IntroducersRegistrars will need to identify Introducers who can help enrol beneficiaries who lack PoA/PoI documents.Registrar identifies introducers region wise and prepares list by District/State in which the Introducer is authorized to work. Registrars can also leverage CSOs to better reach marginalized residents, act as Introducers, and build awareness among them to mobilize enrolments from this group. Based on inputs from UIDAI, review and finalize list of Introducers and notify the same in a public manner.Introducers need to be Enroled in advance and have their Aadhaar numbers generated, registered and activated in Aadhaar database. Organize camps for enrolment of Introducers to ensure that all Introducers on the final list are Enroled into the program.Introducer workshop is held to appraise them about their roles & responsibilitiesIntroducers are required to sign consent to being a Introducer which is stored by the Registrar. Introducer consent form format is provided by UIDAI. Put in place systems to ensure ongoing monitoring of the Introducer list occurs at regular intervals. Based on performance, make changes/additions to the list as required and share with UIDAI. Ensure that both UIDAI and the Registrar have most up-to-date list of Introducers at all times.Publicise the Introducer concept to make residents aware. Provide the resident information about acceptable Introducers. Publish list of Introducers and Verifiers at the enrolment centres along with their contact details. Detailed guidelines on Introducer selection, Introducers roles and liabilities are defined by UIDAI and published on UIDAI portal. 17. Identify and Deploy Verifiers Registrar must appoint Verifiers for every centre.Firm up Verification process. Shortlist the Verifiers and Registrar’s supervisor. Schedule camps to educate verifiers.The Registrar must ensure physical presence of verifiers during the operational hours of the enrolment centre and may appoint more than one Verifier in a centre, if and where required. The performance of Verifiers may be monitored by the Registrar.The list of all Verifiers must be notified, by designation, by the Registrar before commencement of the enrolments and the list should be shared with the Regional office concerned.They may be paid by the registrars out of the financial support provided by UIDAI to Registrars on successful Aadhaar generation. Roles and Responsibilities of Verifiers are defined by UIDAI. 18. Personnel for Grievance RedressalThe registrar is expected to put in place a Team that would serve to quickly address any matters requiring resolution that may pertain to the Registrar, but may be conveyed to the UIDAI Contact Centre. The Time taken for resolutions is to be finalized jointly.Registrar should also identify an Officer to whom all relevant grievances may be forwarded and two senior officers for managing escalations of the same.19. Print and Distribute Enrolment formsEnrolment form is designed by UIDAI for capturing Aadhaar enrolment data.Registrar can have a separate form for capturing KYR+ data.Registrar needs to get the enrolment forms printed in sufficient quantities.Registrar must ensure that the forms are available/ distributed free of cost at the enrolment centres.20. Data TransferFinalise, with EA, Resident Data packets transfer modalities. Data can be transferred to UIDAI using online SFTP mode or through hard disks/memory sticks sent through suitable courier service.Also define KYR+ and registrar data packet transfer mode and frequency.21. For Document ManagementUIDAI mandates storage of Enrolment form, PoI, PoA, DoB, PoR, and consent. These documents carry important and confidential resident information. UIDAI urges to handle enrolment documents with care and protect it from damage and theft. Registrar must do the following: Identify whether the documents would be stored in hard copy/soft, scanned copy Setup a mechanism for collecting and securely storing all the documents submitted by residents during enrolment till the UIDAI appointed DMS service provider collects document from registrar offices and provide receipt of the same. Upon accumulation of specified batches of documents at one site, intimate UIDAI’s DMS service provider for pickup of documents, handover documents and obtain sign off. Detailed process and guidelines of Document management and Registrar’s role in same are published by UIDAI in Document Management Process. If Registrar wants to store any additional documents, they may develop their own process for storing and managing those documents. 22. Provide requisite data to Contact Centre The UIDAI has set up a Contact Centre for concern and issues that residents or UIDAI eco system partner may have in terms of enrolment, authentication and identity frauds etc. This contact centre serves as a single point of contact for the organization. Certain information is required by the contact centre, from the Registrar, related to enrolment exercise in their area. Registrars must furnish such details to the Contact centre to help effective functioning of the centre. 23. Monitoring and Audits Registrar is responsible for Field level execution, monitoring and audit. Audit enrolment centre readiness, EA processes and their effectiveness. It is recommended that Registrars setup a process to audit the performance of Enrolment Agencies and other partners they engage with. Registrar must conduct sample audits in the entire gamut of enrolment process and data quality, training, logistics, grievance resolution and updation processes for controllership purposes. Ensure IEC norms are being adhered to. Advise EAs to deploy IEC elements in a judicious and practical manner. Monitor the performance of Introducers and Verifiers. The Registrar may also undertake appropriate measures such as monitoring of payment to operators’ and supervisors’ bank accounts, regular audits of EAs and enrolment centres, etc. to prevent sub-contracting. Randomly Review Acknowledgement and Consent data against PoI, PoA documents to ensure that data entered in the software is correct for each resident. In case any error is found in the data entered, inform the EA Supervisor and/or resident to initiate data correction. 24. MIS Registrar must develop their own MIS systems for execution, monitoring and control. Registrar may help provide UID with reports/insights in significant issues as and when required by UIDAI. 25. Data Protection and Security Guidelines for Registrars Registrars have a fiduciary responsibility and have to exercise a duty of care to secure and protect all the data (demographic and biometric) collected from the resident. UIDAI prescribes broad measures for data protection and security to be adopted by Registrars. Registrars must refer and abide by the same. 26. Enforcement of UIDAI’s suspension/debarment/dis-empanelment decisions UIDAI monitors the performance and data quality of Enrolment Agencies and their Operators and Supervisors on a continuous basis. UIDAI has formulated a suspension policy for non-compliant EAs and their Operators and Supervisors. Registrar will be notified of the action where suspension/debarment/ dis-empanelment criteria are met. Registrars must get in touch with the UIDAI Regional Office and take immediate appropriate actions when intimated of such decisions. 27. Enforcement of UIDAI’s Returned Letters policy A report on returned letters will be shared by UIDAI with Registrars. Registrars must Review and investigate the various reason codes for Returned Letters. Where possible and required, Registrars may contact the Residents and educate residents on how to get in touch with contact centre for their Letters. Registrars may involve/take help from India Post in investigations. 28. Ensure UIDAI Exit Policy requirements are fulfilled If and when Registrar decides to exit the Aadhaar enrolment programme, they must fulfil requirements and sign necessary documents to meet the requirements of UIDAI’s exit policy.	episode_done:True
text:How does the Registrar get started on UIDAI project?	labels:The UIDAI has also defined a detailed Registrar Onboarding Process and Guide in order to support Registrars across the stages of becoming Aadhaar Ready. A high level summary of it is in this document: 1. Setting Up Committees and Joint Working GroupsSet up Apex/ Empowered Committee headed by CM and an Implementation Committee headed by Chief Secretary. It is recommended that UIDAI Regional Office and State UIDICs must coordinate with the State Registrars (SRs) and Non State Registrars (NSRs) in their States to increase accountability across stakeholders and facilitate the working of NSRs in tandem with SRs. Identify Nodal Department for Aadhaar; Identify Departments which will act as Registrars along with a nodal Officer. Other Departments which are not included as Registrars in the project at the time of enrolment, will have the option of ‘Aadhaar enabling’ their systems at a later date. The Nodal and the Registrar departments can be the same department or different departments.Ensure MoU is signed Identify Agency for Receiving financial assistance for enrolment: The UID Authority provides some financial support to its Registrars per successful enrolment into the UID system. To operationalise this arrangement, the Registrars will have to provide the details of the Registrar (name and account details) through which they would like to receive the amount.Setup Joint Working Group – headed by the Head of the Nodal/Registrar Dept. The other members should be Officers, who can lead the Technology, Process, IEC, Applications teams from the Registrar’s side. UIDAI will nominate appropriate representatives to assist the State Government/Registrars in carrying through the entire process. Bank representatives may be included where the Financial Inclusion (FI) solution is a part of enrolment. Ensure smooth functioning and active participation of the working group during UIDAI – Registrar alignment.Ensure deliverables / project plan activities as mentioned in the UIDAI Registrar Readiness Checklist (RRC) are executed. Update RRC along with UIDAI nodal officer and EA at each stage. Hand over the signed checklist to Regional Office/Nodal Officer. 2. Sensitization WorkshopsA series of sensitization workshops are held to provide an overview of Aadhaar, enrolment and IEC approach, roles and responsibilities at State/District/ Village levels, enrolment strategy and plans.This will be followed by a set of sub-group workshops and meetings with members of the process, technology, IEC and applications teams respectively to identify the key areas of integration and implement the same. Ensure that Registrar’s technology, process & IEC aspects are aligned with UIDAI.A “Go Live readiness Workshop” will be scheduled 2-3 weeks before scheduled ‘go-live’ date to take stock of the implementation status on items required to start enrolments. Registrar must advise UIDAI’s focal point on modalities for setting up the on-boarding workshop and should ensure that the required stakeholders and members of working group attend the workshop.Define the role of Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) in the enrolment process and develop a panel of CSOs at the local level who can help enrol marginalized communities. Social Inclusion is a mandatory requirement for registrars. Special enrolment drives should be initiated by registrars in consultation with ROs for the underprivileged, various vulnerable groups and disabled persons.	episode_done:True
text:Who is a Registrar?	labels:"Registrar" is any entity authorized or recognized by the UID Authority for the purpose of enrolling the individuals for UID numbers. Registrars are typically departments or agencies of the State Government/Union territory, public sector undertakings and other agencies and organizations, who interact with residents in the normal course of implementation of some of their programs, activities or operations. Examples of such Registrars are Rural Development Department (for NREGS) or Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs Department (for TPDS), insurance companies such as Life Insurance Corporation and Banks.Registrars will collect demographic & biometric data from residents directly or through Enrolment Agencies. Registrars have the flexibility to collect additional data, which will be referred to as ‘KYR+’ fields for the various applications they have in mind. The UIDAI has developed standards, procedures and processes, guidelines and technology systems to execute the entire Aadhaar enrolment process which will be adhered to by the Registrars. Registrars can also leverage the Ecosystem that has been built by the UIDAI in order to support them in this process.	episode_done:True
text:How will children be captured in the database?	labels:For children below 5 years no biometrics will be captured. Their UID be processed on the basis of demographic information and facial photograph linked with the UID of their parents. These children will need to update their biometrics of ten fingers, iris and facial photograph, when they turn 5 and 15. Intimation to this effect will be mentioned in the original Aadhaar letter. 	episode_done:True
text:How will the biometric of the differently-abled and people with no finger prints or rugged hands e.g. beedi workers or people with no fingers be captured?	labels:The policy will take into consideration these exceptions and the biometric standards prescribed will ensure that these groups are not excluded. In the case of people without hands/ fingers only photo will be used for identity determination and there will be markers to determine uniqueness. 	episode_done:True
text:How do I enter data in local language?	labels:A local language can be selected during the setup of the enrolment client. The list of available options is a subset of the Input Method Editors (IMEs) installed on the enrolment station. For instance, the operator can install the Google IME (or an IME available from a different source) for Hindi input. When the data entry is performed in English, the text is also transliterated through the IME, and placed on the screen. The operator can then correct this text, using the IME’s built in editing tools, including a virtual keyboard. Certain IMEs allow users to specify a set of macros, and other smart tools to allow easier data entry in the local language.	episode_done:True
text:What do you mean when you say that a particular language is supported?	labels:Supporting a local language implies providing support for: Data entry in local language Transliteration of English language data to local language Labels in local language in the software (on screen) Labels in local language in the print receipt Import of pre-enrolment data in local language (upcoming)	episode_done:True
text:What languages are supported?	labels:Currently the Aadhaar Letters are being printed in the following 13 languages: Hindi/English, Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odia, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu, Urdu. 	episode_done:True
text:How do I make local language the primary source for data entry?	labels:At this time, the primary source for data entry is in English. However, as the technology matures, we expect to change the primary language to local language based on reverse transliteration. Since this is a dependency on technology that is not yet available, we cannot assure a date, however – we are targeting a release in Version 3.0.	episode_done:True
text:What are the common issues seen with Indian Language Input?	labels:The most common problem that UIDAI have seen is with installation of the IME, and it’s interactions with the language bar. Further, it is possible to configure the Windows language input to assume a local language keyboard. This is not the same as transliteration, but assumes a different keyboard is being used – and the results are very different. UIDAI have also had difficulty in truly transliterating English words into local language, as they are very different from the language model. This can be better handled by using advanced facilities in the IMEs (for ex. Schemes in Google IME) The language support must be configured on a per user basis, and that makes it harder to manage.	episode_done:True
text:How do I import pre-enrolment data in local language?	labels:At this time, the support has been provided for import of pre-enrolment data in English. During enrolment process, the data is converted from English to local language through the transliteration engine. The operator can correct this data in the presence of the resident. The software is planned to provide support for import of pre-enrolment data in English, local language or both in future versions. For pre-enrolment data imported in local language, it will not be over-ridden by the transliteration engine. However, a soft keypad / IME will be available for editing the data.	episode_done:True
text:What language will the database be maintained? In what language will authentication services be provided? In what language will communication between UIDAI and the resident take place?	labels:The database will be maintained in English. The communication between resident and UIDAI will be in English and the local language.	episode_done:True
text:Is training mandatory?	labels:Training is not mandatory; however it is recommended that the people desirous of working with the Enrolment Agencies (EA) as Operator /Supervisor and Operator Child Enrolment Lite Client undergo the Training Programme conducted by Registrar & Enrolment Agency.	episode_done:True
text:Who will train the EA Operators/Supervisor & Operator CELC?	labels:Training for the Enrolment Staff is provided mainly by the Registrar & Enrolment Agency internally. The EAs can get their staff trained through their own trainers or by UIDAI Regional Offices on request. The staff can also self-train with the help of Training Material available on https://uidai.gov.in/aadhaar-eco-system/training-testing-certification-ecosystem.html 	episode_done:True
text:What are the different types of Training available in UIDAI?	labels:a. Master Trainer Training (TOT) is organized by Regional Offices for creation of Master Trainers who in turn train other EA Staff.b. Orientation/ Refresher Programs are anchored by ROs for EA Staff for quality enhancement and refreshing their knowledge from time to time as and when any new change is introduced in Enrolment Process. 	episode_done:True
text:What is the duration of training?	labels:Duration of training will depend on requirement of Registrar/ EAs. EA may customize the material as per local needs and create additional content to make it Registrar specific, if required. 	episode_done:True
text:What are the different categories of Training Material available?	labels:Training Material including Modules on Aadhaar Enrolment and Update, Aadhaar Update and Child Enrolment Lite Client required for certification of EA Staff - Operator/Supervisor and Operator CELC is available on https://uidai.gov.in/enrolment-update/enrolment.html 	episode_done:True
text:Where can one access Training Material?	labels:It can be accessed on https://uidai.gov.in/aadhaar-eco-system/training-testing-certification-ecosystem.html 	episode_done:True
text:Is testing mandatory for working as Enrolment Agency Operator/Supervisor or Operator CELC under UIDAI?	labels:Yes. Testing and Certification for Enrolment Operator/Supervisor and Operator CELC is mandatory. No enrolment can be performed without a valid certificate. 	episode_done:True
text:Is there any basis qualification required for certification?	labels:To qualify for the role of Supervisor, the person should satisfy the following criteria: a) The person should be of age 18 years and above. b) The person shall be 10+2 pass and should preferably be a graduate c) The person should have a good understanding and experience of using a computer d) The person should preferably have prior experience of working in Aadhaar Enrolment program To qualify for the role of Operator, the person should satisfy the following criteria: a) The person should be of age 18 years and above b) The person shall be minimum 10+2 pass. c) The person should have a basic understanding of operating a computer and should be comfortable with local language keyboard and transliteration To qualify for the role of Operator CELC, the person should satisfy the following criteria: a) The person should be of age 18 years and above. b) The person shall be minimum 10+2 pass. In case of Anganwadi/Asha Worker, the minimum qualification is 10th pass c) The person should have a basic understanding of operating a computer and should be comfortable with local language keyboard and transliteration 	episode_done:True
text:Is Aadhaar Number mandatory for the Certification?	labels:Yes. To register for the certification exam the candidate should have a valid Aadhaar Number. Exam registration details should be exactly similar to information mentioned in candidate’s Aadhaar. Candidate should download the latest copy of e-Aadhaar having Virtual ID printed from the following link: https://eaadhaar.uidai.gov.in/  	episode_done:True
text:Where is the question bank for Certification test available?	labels:Question bank in 13 regional languages containing 510 questions for Operator/Supervisor exam and 75 questions for Operator CELC is available on https://uidai.gov.in/aadhaar-eco-system/training-testing-certification-ecosystem.html  	episode_done:True
text:What is the structure of the certification test?	labels:The duration of Test will be 110 minutes with Text based Multiple Choice Questions only. There will be 110 Questions for Operator/Supervisor Certification and 35 Questions for Operator CELC Certification Exam. The detailed module wise Test Structure is available on https://uidai.gov.in/aadhaar-eco-system/training-testing-certification-ecosystem.html  	episode_done:True
text:Who will conduct the test?	labels:M/S NSEiTLtd (http://uidai.nseitexams.com) is the agency chosen by UIDAI for complete Testing and Certification. 	episode_done:True
text:What are the fees for taking the Certification test?	labels:Rs. 470. 82 (including GST) and RETEST FEE Rs. 235.41 (including GST) are applicable. The fee has to be paid online through the facility provided by NSEIT Ltd on its registration portal. Only retest fee is applicable in case the candidate fails or is absent for the exam. 	episode_done:True
text:What is the validity of exam fee?	labels:As per UIDAI’s Testing and Certification Policy "The candidates must schedule their test within 6 months of depositing the fee, failing which, their fee shall be forfeited and they shall not be allowed to appear for the test against that fee. 	episode_done:True
text:Can the EA/Registrar make Bulk Online Payment, Registration and Scheduling of the candidates’ test/retest?	labels:Yes. The EA/Registrar should contact Training Testing and Certification Division UIDAI HQ for registering for bulk services. 	episode_done:True
text:Where should contact in case of any problem in Registration?	labels:You can contact NSEiT Helpdesk on Toll free No.: 022-42706500 or send email to:This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. document.getElementById('cloak956f7f27dd49608867ba259202f93ec4').innerHTML = ''; var prefix = '&#109;a' + 'i&#108;' + '&#116;o'; var path = 'hr' + 'ef' + '='; var addy956f7f27dd49608867ba259202f93ec4 = '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;_&#97;dm&#105;n' + '&#64;'; addy956f7f27dd49608867ba259202f93ec4 = addy956f7f27dd49608867ba259202f93ec4 + 'ns&#101;&#105;t' + '&#46;' + 'c&#111;m'; var addy_text956f7f27dd49608867ba259202f93ec4 = '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;_&#97;dm&#105;n' + '&#64;' + 'ns&#101;&#105;t' + '&#46;' + 'c&#111;m';document.getElementById('cloak956f7f27dd49608867ba259202f93ec4').innerHTML += '<a ' + path + '\'' + prefix + ':' + addy956f7f27dd49608867ba259202f93ec4 + '\' target="_blank" class="external">'+addy_text956f7f27dd49608867ba259202f93ec4+'<\/a>'; document.getElementById('cloak4177ea5eac9fd1852ad69274da88a765').innerHTML = '';var prefix = '&#109;a' + 'i&#108;' + '&#116;o';var path = 'hr' + 'ef' + '=';var addy4177ea5eac9fd1852ad69274da88a765 = '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;_&#97;dm&#105;n' + '&#64;';addy4177ea5eac9fd1852ad69274da88a765 = addy4177ea5eac9fd1852ad69274da88a765 + 'ns&#101;&#105;t' + '&#46;' + 'c&#111;m';var addy_text4177ea5eac9fd1852ad69274da88a765 = '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;_&#97;dm&#105;n' + '&#64;' + 'ns&#101;&#105;t' + '&#46;' + 'c&#111;m';document.getElementById('cloak4177ea5eac9fd1852ad69274da88a765').innerHTML += '<a ' + path + '\'' + prefix + ':' + addy4177ea5eac9fd1852ad69274da88a765 + '\' target="_blank">'+addy_text4177ea5eac9fd1852ad69274da88a765+'<\/a>'; 	episode_done:True
text:How will this test be conducted?	labels:It will an Internet based testing in proctored environment at the specified test centers. 	episode_done:True
text:Where is the NSEIT Test Centre located?	labels:Test Centers are available across various states of India. Detailed information regarding the test centers is available on the NSEIT Ltd portal http://uidai.nseitexams.com 	episode_done:True
text:How many times can I take the test?	labels:The candidate can take unlimited number of attempts before he passes the certification exam. 	episode_done:True
text:In case I have to take a retest, would I have to pay the fee again?	labels:Yes. Every time the retest is taken, fee of Rs 235.41 (including GST per Retest would be applicable. 	episode_done:True
text:Will I have to take the retest in all the modules even If I pass a few modules in first attempt?	labels:Yes. Every time the candidate has to clear the complete exam including all the modules. 	episode_done:True
text:Is there a need of recertification?	labels:In case the candidate certified for Operator/CELC Operator role wants to become Supervisor, candidate can take certification exam for Enrolment Operator/Supervisor again. 	episode_done:True
text:Can Blacklisted Operator/Supervisor get recertified?	labels:No! Aadhaar numbers of all the Blacklisted Operators/Supervisors are blocked. In case the candidate gets recertified, his/her Certificate will be rejected by UIDAI. 	episode_done:True
text:Who will issue the certificate? UIDAI or NSEiT?	labels:The Certificate will be given by NSEIT Ltd. 	episode_done:True
text:How can I familiarize myself with flow of the test flow?	labels:The test familiarization module or MOCK Exam is available on the NSEIT Ltd portal: https://uidai.nseitexams.com after successful registration and fee payment 	episode_done:True
text:Where should contact in case of any Certificate is not available with UIDAI database?	labels:You can contact UIDAI Technical Helpdesk on 080-23099400 or send email to This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. document.getElementById('cloaked28bc583970e8017adcbe45259f6c09').innerHTML = ''; var prefix = '&#109;a' + 'i&#108;' + '&#116;o'; var path = 'hr' + 'ef' + '='; var addyed28bc583970e8017adcbe45259f6c09 = 't&#101;chs&#117;pp&#111;rt' + '&#64;'; addyed28bc583970e8017adcbe45259f6c09 = addyed28bc583970e8017adcbe45259f6c09 + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'n&#101;t' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n'; var addy_texted28bc583970e8017adcbe45259f6c09 = 't&#101;chs&#117;pp&#111;rt' + '&#64;' + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'n&#101;t' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n';document.getElementById('cloaked28bc583970e8017adcbe45259f6c09').innerHTML += '<a ' + path + '\'' + prefix + ':' + addyed28bc583970e8017adcbe45259f6c09 + '\' title="NSE Exams" target="_blank" class="external">'+addy_texted28bc583970e8017adcbe45259f6c09+'<\/a>'; document.getElementById('cloakb43b1da9d458a353ee7839d8a0e3489f').innerHTML = '';var prefix = '&#109;a' + 'i&#108;' + '&#116;o';var path = 'hr' + 'ef' + '=';var addyb43b1da9d458a353ee7839d8a0e3489f = 't&#101;chs&#117;pp&#111;rt' + '&#64;';addyb43b1da9d458a353ee7839d8a0e3489f = addyb43b1da9d458a353ee7839d8a0e3489f + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'n&#101;t' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n';var addy_textb43b1da9d458a353ee7839d8a0e3489f = 't&#101;chs&#117;pp&#111;rt' + '&#64;' + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'n&#101;t' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n';document.getElementById('cloakb43b1da9d458a353ee7839d8a0e3489f').innerHTML += '<a ' + path + '\'' + prefix + ':' + addyb43b1da9d458a353ee7839d8a0e3489f + '\' title="NSE Exams" target="_blank">'+addy_textb43b1da9d458a353ee7839d8a0e3489f+'<\/a>'; 	episode_done:True
text:Where should the candidate contact after certification in case of Freelancer?	labels:You can contact Aadhaar Enrolment Agencies near your location for getting engaged as Enrolment Staff with them 	episode_done:True
text:Is there any validity of the Certificate?	labels:Yes, the Certificate is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 	episode_done:True
text:Can the certification fee refundable?	labels:No, there is no refund of the Test/Retest fee. 	episode_done:True
text:What are the mandatory requirement to register for the Certification Exam	labels:a) Candidate must have his/her mobile number registered in Aadhaar. b) Candidate must not be blacklisted. c) Candidate must be 18 Years in Age d) Candidate must download Offline Aadhaar Information –XML File from https://resident.uidai.gov.in/offlineaadhaar  e) Candidate must download e-Aadhaar containing VID from https://eaadhaar.uidai.gov.in/  f) Candidate must read Test Structure, Leaner Guide and Test Structure available on https://uidai.gov.in/aadhaar-eco-system/training-testing-certification-ecosystem.html  g) Candidate must be qualified for the Test 	episode_done:True
text:How can the candidate register for the Certification Exam?	labels:Candidate must read the instruction provided on https://uidai.nseitexams.com/UIDAI/LoginAction_showHowToApply.action  	episode_done:True
text:Can I update the date of birth in my Aadhaar?	labels:YES. You can update the date of birth in your Aadhaar with a valid Date of Birth (DoB) Proof (refer: https://uidai.gov.in/images/commdoc/valid_documents_list.pdf) having your name. 	episode_done:True
text:I have already updated Date of Birth in my Aadhaar once. Can I update/ correct it again?	labels:You can update the Date of Birth (DoB) in your Aadhaar only once. In case you have a genuine need to update the DoB again, you have to follow an exception process as given below:  Visit any Aadhaar Kendra with a valid Date of Birth (DoB) Proof in your name as per this list: https://uidai.gov.in/images/commdoc/valid_documents_list.pdf If this request gets rejected, call 1947 or write to This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. document.getElementById('cloakeafce07bce158c0caff231f2b1830fb2').innerHTML = ''; var prefix = '&#109;a' + 'i&#108;' + '&#116;o'; var path = 'hr' + 'ef' + '='; var addyeafce07bce158c0caff231f2b1830fb2 = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;'; addyeafce07bce158c0caff231f2b1830fb2 = addyeafce07bce158c0caff231f2b1830fb2 + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n'; var addy_texteafce07bce158c0caff231f2b1830fb2 = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;' + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n';document.getElementById('cloakeafce07bce158c0caff231f2b1830fb2').innerHTML += '<a ' + path + '\'' + prefix + ':' + addyeafce07bce158c0caff231f2b1830fb2 + '\'>'+addy_texteafce07bce158c0caff231f2b1830fb2+'<\/a>'; and request for ‘exception update’ by sharing your latest Update Request Number and contact details. 	episode_done:True
text:I recently updated my Date of Birth, but it got rejected. What to do now?	labels:If you are updating your Date of Birth for the first time, you may check the reason for rejection of your request by calling 1947 and take corrective action accordingly. 	episode_done:True
text:I sent my details to help centre/ regional office but my request got rejected. What to do now?	labels:Please follow the steps applicable to your case:  If you have updated your Date of Birth (DoB) prior to 14.10.2019 & it was your first DoB update and it got rejected with reject reasons like ‘Date of Birth gap more than allowed limit’ or ‘Date of Birth already verified’, then, you may update your DoB again by visiting an Aadhaar Kendra. Pls ensure that you submit a valid document (refer: https://uidai.gov.in/images/commdoc/valid_documents_list.pdf) having your name and correct DoB. If your Date of Birth request was submitted after 14.10.2019 and it was your first DoB update, then you may check the reason for rejection of your request by calling 1947 and take corrective action accordingly. If this was the second update in your Date of Birth, then call 1947 or write to This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. document.getElementById('cloak20e1a5f048ca69c9c3990b42d684bb1f').innerHTML = ''; var prefix = '&#109;a' + 'i&#108;' + '&#116;o'; var path = 'hr' + 'ef' + '='; var addy20e1a5f048ca69c9c3990b42d684bb1f = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;'; addy20e1a5f048ca69c9c3990b42d684bb1f = addy20e1a5f048ca69c9c3990b42d684bb1f + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n'; var addy_text20e1a5f048ca69c9c3990b42d684bb1f = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;' + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n';document.getElementById('cloak20e1a5f048ca69c9c3990b42d684bb1f').innerHTML += '<a ' + path + '\'' + prefix + ':' + addy20e1a5f048ca69c9c3990b42d684bb1f + '\'>'+addy_text20e1a5f048ca69c9c3990b42d684bb1f+'<\/a>'; and request for ‘exception update’ by sharing your latest Update Request Number and contact details. 	episode_done:True
text:What is Aadhaar Seva Kendra	labels:‘Aadhaar Seva Kendra’ or ASK is a single stop destination for all Aadhaar services for the residents. Managed directly by UIDAI, the ASK offer dedicated Aadhaar enrolment and update services to residents in a state-of-the-art environment.  The Aadhaar Seva Kendra offer a comfortable air conditioned environment to residents. All ASK are wheel-chair friendly and have special provisions to service the elderly or specially-abled. More info on ASK available here: https://uidai.gov.in/ecosystem/enrolment-ecosystem/aadhaar-seva-kendra.html  	episode_done:True
text:How many Aadhaar Seva Kendra are there in India	labels:In the first phase of the Aadhaar Seva Kendra project, UIDAI plans to set up 114 Aadhaar Seva Kendra across 53 cities in India. These include dedicated centres in all metro cities, all state capitals and Union Territories. A consolidated list of all functional ASK is available at: https://uidai.gov.in/ecosystem/enrolment-ecosystem/aadhaar-seva-kendra.html  The ASK will run along with over 35,000 Aadhaar Kendra already being run by banks, post offices, BSNL and state governments.  	episode_done:True
text:What are the timings of Aadhaar Seva Kendra	labels:Aadhaar Seva Kendras are open all 7 days of the week from 9:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. (IST). Other registrar-run Aadhaar Kendra follow timings as defined by their respective registrars. Residents may contact their nearby Aadhaar Kendra for more info. 	episode_done:True
text:Can I update my Aadhaar at Aadhaar Seva Kendra	labels:Residents can visit any convenient Aadhaar Seva Kendra for the following services:  Aadhaar Enrolment Update of any Demographic Information in their Aadhaar - Name, Address, Gender, Date of Birth, Mobile number or Email Id Update of Biometric data in their Aadhaar – Photo, Fingerprints and Iris Scans Mandatory Biometric update of children (attaining the age of 5 and 15 years) Download & Print Aadhaar   These services are available for any resident of India and NRIs at any Aadhaar Seva Kendra across the country.  	episode_done:True
text:Is the Aadhaar centre at my nearby bank/ post office also an Aadhaar Seva Kendra	labels:Aadhaar services are also available at over 35,000 banks, post offices, BSNL centre and state government offices. These centres offer Aadhaar enrolment and update services to residents along with their usual customer services. These are also Aadhaar Seva Kendra in the service sense.   The Aadhaar Kendra can handle up to 50-100 service requests per day. However, the UIDAI-run Aadhaar Seva Kendras have 4/8/16 operator stations with the capacity to handle up to 250/500/1000 service requests per day.  The ASK have a comfortable AC environment and follow Automated Token Management system and Online Appointment system for effective queue management. 	episode_done:True
text:What is the service process at ASK	labels:The ASK follow an online Appointment Management System (AMS) for residents who choose to book their appointment prior to visiting the ASK and an automated Token Management System (TMS) for the walk-in residents at the ASK. The last token for the day is given at 5:30 pm everyday  The below image gives a 6 step process of how any resident can update their details in their Aadhaar:  A detailed process video of the services at ASK is available here: https://youtu.be/TjQjys5HPsU . The process is same for Aadhaar enrolment too.  Each Aadhaar Seva Kendra has an Operations Manager and a Centre Manager. In case, any resident has any grievance, they can contact either of these. Further, residents can also reach UIDAI Help Centre at 1947 or email to This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. document.getElementById('cloak8f4869ed709206c6b36a8807101d5ce6').innerHTML = ''; var prefix = '&#109;a' + 'i&#108;' + '&#116;o'; var path = 'hr' + 'ef' + '='; var addy8f4869ed709206c6b36a8807101d5ce6 = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;'; addy8f4869ed709206c6b36a8807101d5ce6 = addy8f4869ed709206c6b36a8807101d5ce6 + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n'; var addy_text8f4869ed709206c6b36a8807101d5ce6 = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;' + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n';document.getElementById('cloak8f4869ed709206c6b36a8807101d5ce6').innerHTML += '<a ' + path + '\'' + prefix + ':' + addy8f4869ed709206c6b36a8807101d5ce6 + '\'>'+addy_text8f4869ed709206c6b36a8807101d5ce6+'<\/a>';    	episode_done:True
text:Are the services charges different for Aadhaar Seva Kendra	labels:NO. The charges for Aadhaar Services are same across all Aadhaar Seva Kendra and Aadhaar Kendra in the country. These are:    S.NO. SERVICE COST   1. Aadhaar Enrolment FREE   2. Mandatory Biometric Update FREE   3. Demographic Update (Any type/ Any channel) Rs. 50/- (Inclusive of GST)   4. Biometric Update Rs. 100/- (Inclusive of GST)   5. Aadhaar download and colour print-out on A4 sheet Rs.30/- per Aadhaar (Inclusive of GST)    Residents may note that there are no charges for the Aadhaar Enrolment/ Correction/ Update Form. Update of more than one field on single instance is considered as one update. These charges are inclusive of any applicable taxes. The residents can make the payment at ‘Cash Counter’ available at the ASK or make online payment (to be launched soon) at the time of booking online appointment from UIDAI website 	episode_done:True
text:Can I book my appointment for Aadhaar update	labels:Yes. UIDAI offers online facility to book appointment for Aadhaar enrolment or update to all residents from:  mAadhaar App UIDAI website: https://appointments.uidai.gov.in/bookappointment.aspx   The resident can use the online appointment service to book appointment for themselves or a family member or friend. This is a FREE service. Additionally, resident can choose to make online payment (to be launched soon) for Aadhaar update at the time of booking appointment. Watch the video tutorial: https://youtu.be/8ZurY3nrv7U 	episode_done:True
text:Can I reschedule/ cancel my appointment	labels:Yes. Login to the appointment portal with the same mobile number/ email ID (as given earlier) and select the previous appointment to reschedule.  	episode_done:True
text:I did not get my Aadhaar Card. Can I get that at Aadhaar Seva Kendra	labels: You can download your Aadhaar yourself. You need to have Aadhaar registered mobile number for this.  If you don’t have your Aadhaar registered mobile number or do not want use this online service, you can use the Aadhaar download and coloured print service available at Aadhaar Seva Kendra at a charge of Rs. 30. Physical presence of the Aadhaar holder is required for biometric authentication. You can also order a printed copy of Aadhaar Letter from our website. 	episode_done:True
text:I lost my Aadhaar and my mobile number is also not registered in Aadhaar. Can I get that at ASK	labels:Yes. You may visit any UIDAI-run Aadhaar Seva Kendra to download your Aadhaar and get a printout. This service is available at UIDAI-run ASK only. This will be extended to other Aadhaar Kendra in Banks, Post Offices, BSNL Centres or State Government offices later. You can also follow the below steps to get back your Aadhaar without having to go anywhere:  Call our helpline 1947 to retrieve your Enrolment ID Use this Enrolment ID to Order Aadhaar Reprint The reprinted Aadhaar is delivered to your registered address within 15 days   	episode_done:True
text:My Date of Birth/ Name/ Gender update request got rejected and I have been asked to contact Regional Office. Can I do that update at Aadhaar Seva Kendra	labels:No. The second time update of Date of Birth or Gender or third time update of Name of the resident comes under ‘exception update’. These require due diligence by the authorized officials. You need to contact the Aadhaar regional office that handles your state/ region. Details available here: https://uidai.gov.in/contact-support/contact-directory/regional-offices.html 	episode_done:True
text:What is Aadhaar authentication?	labels:“Aadhaar Authentication” is a process by which the Aadhaar number along with demographic information (such as name, date of birth, gender etc) or biometric information (Fingerprint or Iris) of an individual is submitted to UIDAI’s Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR) for its verification and UIDAI verifies the correctness of the details submitted, or the lack thereof, on the basis of information available with it.	episode_done:True
text:When do I need to authenticate?	labels:Various government schemes and private service providers such as PDS, NREGA, banks and telecom operators have adopted Aadhaar authentication for verification of their beneficiaries/customers. The authentication is generally done either at the time of delivery of benefits or subscribing to the service.	episode_done:True
text:What are the benefits of Aadhaar authentication?	labels:Aadhaar authentication provides an instant mechanism to prove your identity through online authentication. Therefore one need not carry any other ID proof except Aadhaar number.	episode_done:True
text:Is there a mechanism to notify the residents when an authentication occurs against their Aadhaar number?	labels:UIDAI notifies the authentication on the registered email of the resident. Every time UIDAI receives a biometric or OTP based authentication request against an Aadhaar number, a notification is sent to the registered email address.	episode_done:True
text:I received an authentication notification even though I did not authenticate myself. Whom do I approach?	labels:UIDAI contact information, call centre number and e-mail Id are provided in the UIDAI’s notification email. You may contact UIDAI with the authentication details provided in the notification e-mail.	episode_done:True
text:Do I need to authenticate with only my thumbs?	labels:Aadhaar authentication can be achieved with any of the ten fingers.	episode_done:True
text:What if my authentication request gets rejected even though I provide my fingerprints with my Aadhaar number?	labels:If fingerprint authentication fails, residents can Retry with correct placement and pressure of finger on fingerprint scannerRetry with different fingersCleaning the fingerprint scannerCleaning the fingers If biometric authentication fails repeatedly over a period of time, resident may approach an Aadhaar updation centre and get their biometrics updated with UIDAI.	episode_done:True
text:Will I be denied my entitlements (ration, NREGA job etc.) if my authentication request is rejected?	labels:UIDAI and the service providers availing Aadhaar authentication recognize the fact that Aadhaar authentication is subject to certain technological and biometric limitations such as poor fingerprint quality, network availability etc. Therefore the service providers will have alternate processes to identify/ authenticate their beneficiaries/ customers, including exception handling mechanism at their point of presence, so that residents are not denied entitlements due to technological or biometric limitations.	episode_done:True
text:How will I authenticate if my fingerprints are worn out / I have no fingers?	labels:Service providers are advised to deploy alternate authentication mechanisms such as iris authentication, OTP authentication to handle such issues. Additionally, service provider may have other methods of verification of their beneficiaries.	episode_done:True
text:How do I request for OTP?	labels:OTP can be requested through service providers’ application requiring OTP authentication on mobile number registered with UIDAI.	episode_done:True
text:How to update my Aadhaar in ration card?	labels:We recommend that you submit a photocopy of your Aadhaar with a copy of ration card to your PDS shop. They may ask you to place a finger on a sensor to authenticate to check that you and your Aadhaar number are matched.	episode_done:True
text:Name different in Aadhaar vis-à-vis service delivery database?	labels:Based on which document needs name correction, such document should be corrected. In case the name correction is to be done in Aadhaar, then you can visit the nearest permanent enrolment centre to update your name, age, address, mobile number and other demographic details (list available at www.uidai.gov.in). Based on update needs documentary proof you will be needed to bring proof for identity and correspondence address.	episode_done:True
text:My fingers do not work, when asked to place them on finger print device?	labels:You can visit the nearest permanent enrolment centre to update your biometrics (list available at www.uidai.gov.in). We suggest that you carry proofs for identity and correspondence address. Also, we strongly recommend that you give mobile number, this will help you get confirmation message as when your records are updated.	episode_done:True
text:Have multiple accounts, where will I receive the money?	labels:Please give your copy of Aadhaar letter with your bank account number written on it or copy of your bank passbook. The bank may require you to fill a form as well. Updating your mobile number in bank is also advisable. This will send out SMS alerts when you get DBT in account or you transact on your account. Please note that the bank account which has been seeded last with the Aadhaar number will be the one to receive money through DBT.	episode_done:True
text:Do I need Aadhaar to get my DBT?	labels:Most of the schemes are seeking Aadhaar number to identify the beneficiaries to remove fakes and duplicates from their database. It is strongly recommended that you give them Aadhaar to assist them and yourself to get the benefits. If you do not have Aadhaar, you can always present your Enrolment ID No. (EID), or submit the request with service delivery database owner to get Enroled for Aadhaar with the stated ID documents. This will allow you to continue getting the benefits, subsidy or services without any restrictions.	episode_done:True
text:How do I change my account where to receive DBT funds?	labels:Please give your copy of Aadhaar letter with your bank account number written on it or copy of your bank passbook to the bank where you want to receive the funds. The bank may require you to fill a form as well. Updating your mobile number in bank is also advisable. This will send out SMS alerts when you get DBT in account or you transact on your account.	episode_done:True
text:How would I know that DBT funds have come to my account?	labels:We recommend that you update your mobile number in bank. The Bank will send out SMS alerts when you get DBT in account or you transact on your account. Alternatively, you can also check your account balance using ATM, microATM/ Bank Mitra, internet banking or calling the bank for details of your transactions.	episode_done:True
text:What all can I do using a Bank mitra, who visits my village?	labels:Bank Mitra carries a handheld device, which can allow you multiple type of banking transactions on your Aadhaar linked Bank account. Transactions possible are Balance, Enquiry, Cash Deposit, Cash Withdrawal, Paying Bills, Remitting funds to other Aadhaar holder.	episode_done:True
text:How does Aadhaar base DBT help me as a beneficiary?	labels:Aadhaar seeding your scheme ensures that nobody else can claim your share of the benefits by impersonating you as a person. Also, in case of cash transfers, the money reaches directly to you Aadhaar linked bank account. You do not have to pursue different people to get the funds, besides you can decide which bank account you want to take money in. But all benefits go to your latest Aadhaar linked bank account. You cannot decide that one will go to one bank account and another one to the other bank account.	episode_done:True
text:Why are Government schemes asking for Aadhaar?	labels:It helps schemes to clean out duplicates and fakes, to provide accurate data and enable implementation of direct benefit programs. This overall reduces the costs of identifying person and provides surplus benefits to others who need these benefits.	episode_done:True
text:Will an AADHAAR enabled bank account be opened with every issue of an AADHAAR number?	labels:AADHAAR enabled bank accounts will be opened for every resident, if he or she chooses to consent to the same. This consent will be requested from the resident at the time of enrolment itself. The accounts would be opened for everyone including children.	episode_done:True
text:How will an AADHAAR enabled bank account help a resident that already has a bank account?	labels:It is envisaged that disbursement of social security benefits like pensions, scholarships, MGNREGS wages etc. would be through Aadhaar enabled bank account. We are actively working with states/central ministries to designate Aadhaar enabled accounts for disbursal of all social security benefits. The individual would be able to access his/her AADHAAR enabled bank account through a low cost interoperable micro-ATM network which will have large geographical reach. Instant payments through biometric authentication and mobile payments will also be enabled in the future for such accounts.	episode_done:True
text:I use BHIM. I want to send money to someone. But the recipient does not have any phone or UPI address. Is there any method?	labels:You can send money using Aadhaar Number of recipient. This option is clearly visible in beneficiary Address in BHIM.	episode_done:True
text:What is the method to send money using Aadhaar Number in BHIM?	labels:You need to enter Aadhaar Number of beneficiary and press verify button. System will verify Aadhaar linking and populate beneficiary address and you can send money.	episode_done:True
text:Which account of the recipient will get credited when money is sent to Aadhaar in BHIM?	labels:The Bank Account of the recipient chosen by him/her to receive DBT/Aadhaar Based credits will get credited.	episode_done:True
text:I recently saw certain merchants using Aadhaar Pay POS for receiving payments. Can I use my Aadhaar Number and Fingerprint to make digital payment to such merchants?	labels:Yes, you can use my Aadhaar Number and Fingerprint to make digital payment to such merchants.	episode_done:True
text:I have accounts with more than 1 bank and I have linked all accounts to Aadhaar. Which account can I use for making digital payments using Aadhaar Number?	labels:You can use all accounts. While making Aadhaar Based payment, you will be given an option to choose the bank name from which you want to pay. Thus you have the choice of deciding bank, each time you make a payment.	episode_done:True
text:Will my account be debited online / immediately while paying through Aadhaar Pay?	labels:Yes, your account will be debited online / immediately while paying through Aadhaar Pay.	episode_done:True
text:What are the grievance redressal channels in UIDAI?	labels:UIDAI has set up a Contact Centre for handling queries and grievances related to Aadhaar Enrolment, Updation and other services. At the enrolment centre, the Enrolment Operator gives a printed acknowledgement slip to the resident after the enrolment process which contains the EID(Enrolment Number). By using the EID a resident can approach UIDAI Contact centre on following channels. Contact Centre Detail   Voice – 1947 Email - This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. document.getElementById('cloak8bfd7f589a93e59569280ad8477cb06c').innerHTML = ''; var prefix = '&#109;a' + 'i&#108;' + '&#116;o'; var path = 'hr' + 'ef' + '='; var addy8bfd7f589a93e59569280ad8477cb06c = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;'; addy8bfd7f589a93e59569280ad8477cb06c = addy8bfd7f589a93e59569280ad8477cb06c + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n'; var addy_text8bfd7f589a93e59569280ad8477cb06c = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;' + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n';document.getElementById('cloak8bfd7f589a93e59569280ad8477cb06c').innerHTML += '<a ' + path + '\'' + prefix + ':' + addy8bfd7f589a93e59569280ad8477cb06c + '\'>'+addy_text8bfd7f589a93e59569280ad8477cb06c+'<\/a>'; // <![CDATA[ document.getElementById('cloakf51007d038d859491639242588904c53').innerHTML = '';var prefix = '&#109;a' + 'i&#108;' + '&#116;o';var path = 'hr' + 'ef' + '=';var addyf51007d038d859491639242588904c53 = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;';addyf51007d038d859491639242588904c53 = addyf51007d038d859491639242588904c53 + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n';var addy_textf51007d038d859491639242588904c53 = 'h&#101;lp' + '&#64;' + '&#117;&#105;d&#97;&#105;' + '&#46;' + 'g&#111;v' + '&#46;' + '&#105;n';document.getElementById('cloakf51007d038d859491639242588904c53').innerHTML += '<a ' + path + '\'' + prefix + ':' + addyf51007d038d859491639242588904c53 + '\'>'+addy_textf51007d038d859491639242588904c53+'<\/a>'; // ]]>    Resident portal – File a Complaint  In addition to above, grievances may be lodged through following channels:  By post: Grievances may be lodged in UIDAI HQ and ROs through post/hardcopy. The grievances are examined and then forwarded to concerned Regional Office/ Concerned Section at HQ after approval of Assistant Director General, who is Public Grievance Officer at UIDAI. The concerned Regional Office/Concerned Section disposes the grievance by replying directly to the complainant under intimation to the grievance cell, UIDAI, HQ. Interim replies, if required, are given by the concerned Regional Office/concerned Section at HQ. Through Public Grievance Portal of the Government of India: Grievances may be lodged in UIDAI through the PG portal pgportal.gov.in The grievances are examined and then forwarded online to concerned Regional Office/ Concerned Section at HQ after approval of Assistant Director General, who is the Public Grievance Officer at UIDAI. The concerned Regional Office/Concerned Section disposes the grievance online. Interim replies, if required, are given by the concerned Regional Office/concerned Section at HQ.  	episode_done:True
text:What is UIDAI Chatbot?	labels:Ans: UIDAI Chatbot is the chat platform available on UIDAI official website (uidai.net.in) for quick and automated response about Aadhaar and related features. It is available on the main page of UIDAI website and Resident portal at right bottom. By clicking on blue icon of ‘Ask Aadhaar’, resident can start interacting with Chatbot. 	episode_done:True
text:What all can I ask from Aadhaar Chatbot?	labels:Ans: Aadhaar Chatbot is well trained on all Aadhaar related topics, features and services. Resident can simply type the query in chatbot and get the desired answers immediately. Aadhaar Chatbot is available in Hindi and English. Aadhaar Chatbot also provides the feature of watching related videos on some topics for educating the resident. Aadhaar Chatbot is regularly trained on latest developments and features of Aadhaar. 	episode_done:True
text:Can I get the details of enrolment center of Aadhaar through Chatbot?	labels:Ans: Yes, Aadhaar Chatbot helps the resident to locate a nearby Aadhaar Enrolment Center by entering PIN Code. 	episode_done:True
text:What is the significance of Language icons at the bottom of Chatbot type box?	labels:Ans: Presently, Aadhaar Chatbot supports English and Hindi. The language icons enable the resident to change the language anytime and get the response in the desired language. 	episode_done:True
text:What are the buttons at the top of Chatbot after ‘Getting Started’?	labels:Ans: The dynamic buttons are developed for frequently asked queries in Chatbot. This will help the resident in getting even quicker response. For example: If people are asking more about Aadhaar update process, it will appear in the dynamic box and resident do not need to type the entire question. Resident can just click on that button to get the answer and details about update process. The dynamic questions keep on changing according to the frequency of the asked questions. 	episode_done:True
text:How can I give any feedback on the answer of Chatbot if I want to?	labels:Ans: After every answer given by Aadhaar Chatbot, there is a Thumbs Up/Thumbs down icon present below. Resident can choose to give feedback using these icons which will be duly analysed collectively by UIDAI concerned team time to time. 	episode_done:True
text:Can Aadhaar Chatbot tell me about my Aadhaar Enrolment/Update Status?	labels:Ans: Yes, Aadhaar Chatbot can provide the Enrolment/Update status by entering EID. 	episode_done:True